2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M422 School Name: QUEST TO LEARN Principal: NICHOLAS JURMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Quest to Learn 310200011422 6-12 School Number (DBN): 02M422 351 West 18 th Street, New York, NY 10011 212-488-3645 212-488-3355 Phone Number: Fax: Nick Jurman njurman@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nick Jurman Rachelle Vallon Silvia Bernardo Devin Fitzgibbons MarisolRoman MelonieOlivares Zach Seow AranaShapiro District Information Geographical District: 02 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 7189235145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (7189355618 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nick Jurman Rachelle Vallon Silvia Bernardo William Moyet Nick Day ParickSmith Zach Seow *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Arana Shapiro (Institute of Play) CBO Representative, if applicable Lisa Lam Fern Robles Jenny Foxe Member/ Middle School Parent Member/ Middle School Parent Member/ Middle School Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nick day Elizabeth Kachur MarisolRoman HallieGlickman Julie Timchenko RosinnaAviles AlexaKaplan Member/ High School Parent Member/ High School Parent Member/ High School Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Quest's mission is to empower and engage all students by connecting rigorous learning through innovation to the increasing demands of the global society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Quest to Learn is a 6-12 school in District 2 that was developed in collaboration with the Institute of Play, a non-profit organization that embraces game like learning. The school is working to ensure that all courses are problem based and that all summative assessments end with authentic performance tasks, which includes iteration, responsibility, possibility, diversity, and leadership. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student population is diverse and over 30% of the students have IEPs. The students with IEPs have diverse needs. The majority of students receive ICT support in math and ELA. In our 6th, 8th, 9th and 10th grade classes, we have full time ICT for 3 out of the 4 classes. In our high school, students with IEPs are reading 2-3 grade levels below their current grade level. In math, many of the students struggle with number sense, multiplication, long division, and solving equations. In middle school, students with IEPs are also reading 2-3 grade levels below their current level. They are also struggling with number sense and grade level math skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the past school year, Quest has made great progress in the area of Strong Family/Community Ties, Trust, Effective School Leadership, Collaborative Leadership and Rigorous Instruction, as evidenced by the results from the Learning Environment survey. Additionally, the school has made gains in moving students with IEPs to the least restrictive environment. Our key focus for this academic year is continued excellence and improvement in all areas referenced in the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M422 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 586 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 6 12 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 64 66 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 62.8% % Reduced Lunch 2.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 42.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 20.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 4% 28% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 91% 76% 82.1% 9.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 163 137 90.5% 5.3% 29.9% 22.0% 10.8% 4.3% 4 18% 5.9 27.3% 69% 89% 82% N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Quest to Learn uses game-like learning as a means to engage students in content and skills through challenge based learning. Students are expected to transfer and apply their new skills and content knowledge in new situations at the end of each unit of study. Curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Needs: In our high school, our students with the greatest needs are unsuccessful in their first attempt at the Algebra 1 Regents exam and only 72% of our 10th grade students earned enough credits to be on track for graduation (School Quality Snapshot 2017-18). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase for our 8th and 9th graders taking the Algebra I Regents. All teachers will use greater formative assessments to gauge student understanding and guide differentiation, which will result in an increase in 10% of students passing classes with an 80 or higher based on first and second semester grade data. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The PD committee will develop professional learning opportunities around incorporating UDL principles into units and lesson plans, small and differentiated PD on formative assessments, game based learning and ICT strategies and varying teaching models. all teachers This will be monitored through periodic data analysis, cycles of observation and staff inter-visitation, learning walks, weekly meetings. During department meetings, teachers will use protocols to provide feedback around the use of UDL on unit and lesson plans. Do inquiry work and target instruction based on ongoing assessments. all teachers Every 2 months PD committee, department leads PD Committee Every 2 months Sep-Nov Dec-Feb Mar-Apr May-June Sep-Nov Dec-Feb Mar-Apr May-June Every 2 months principal assistant principals teachers SLT The principal, assistant principals and teachers will provide feedback to parents and students during curriculum night, conferences and parent meetings set up every 2 months to share practices and expectations of our students. parents and students The SLT will discuss progress towards this goal and report to parents and teachers. Parents and Teachers Feb and May 2017 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 13  This will be done during PTA, SLT, emails and newsletters - spearheaded by PC, GC, APs and Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD committee, common planning time for department meetings, grade team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of our students will accumulate enough credits to be on track for promotion, measured by transcripts and scholarship reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will be looking at scholarship reports and transcripts. We will also look at observations, teacher meetings and debriefs - this will be measured in Advance in Domain 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction), analyze differentiated formative and summative assessments as measures to indicate progress. We have built in three marking periods within each semester as check points for teachers, students and parents. We have our "Credit Alert" Google Doc for every marking period, which tracks students that are in danger of failing a marking period. This document articulates interventions, outreach, differentiation and next steps in the classroom. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Fall 2018 CAASS data shows us that some of our students are not on time to their first period classes and therefore their scholarship grades suffer (CAASS and Skedula data). We need a supportive advisory check in time in the morning so that advisors can call the homes of students who haven’t yet arrived to school on time. Our priority is that all of our students arrive to school on time each day to ensure they are successful in all of their classes. We have also established clear rules and expectations for punctuality and student behavior, allowing for an environment that is conducive to student learning and allows the teachers to focus on their pedagogy without distraction or interruption. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through targeted efforts, there will be a 10% increase in on time arrival to school tracked in various school wide systems. This will be a significant increase since we have decreased lateness by 80% in 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). If a student isn’t present, the advisor will contact the student’s home. Clear expectations and consequences Workshops on ELL strategies, formative assessments, ICT strategies and differentiated instruction. The school will develop an attendance team that meets bi-monthly to establish outreach to families and students and develop attendance plans for those students with multiple latenesses to school. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of students who don’t arrive to school on time. Students Teachers Students Sept '18 - June '19 Sept'18-June'19 Sept'18-June'19 Advisors, guidance counselor, social worker Guidance counselors, social worker Guidance counselors, social worker, attendance teacher The SLT will be informed on how attendance is improving, follow up, measured progress and possible next steps. Students Feb and May 2019 SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. This will be done at PTA, SLT, emails and newsletters - this will be spearheaded by PC, GC, AP and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance counselors, advisors and social worker, will reach out to parents/guardians and set up meetings with the student's parents/guardians. The point person will be based on the rapport and relationship one of the above Quest employees has with each specific student - this will be determined during our bi-monthly attendance meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in on time arrival to school as measured by January 2019 attendance data from Skedula and CASS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula and CASS will measure our students that are punctual. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school received a developing in 2.2 (How well does the school assess what students are learning?) on the 2016-17 Quality Review. Additionally, in June 2019, cohort 2022 students will need to pass the Integrated Algebra Regents exam. The school has a strong math department that is committed to developing interventions and strategies to support students with gaps in their math skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through collaborative inquiry work in our math team, Algebra I Regents data will increase to 80% for our 2022 cohort. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students will take baseline and mid-term exams in their Integrated Algebra exam and the math team will use an item analysis to identify skills and content that need reteaching. Students Students who need support developing skills will participate in a twice a week Transitions to Algebra class. Students Math department, special education Math department Baseline in September and midline in January Ongoing throughout the year We have programmed an Algebra/Geometry Bridge class to support students that need to pass the Algebra Regents in January 2017 and will assist in transitioning to Geometry during semester 2. If students need to re take in June 2017, the class will be differentiated for students who need to pass the Algebra Regents and for those that are ready for the Geometry portion of the curriculum. Students Jan. '19 and Principal June '19 AP Math Department Teachers will meet weekly to plan, differentiate and target students in need. Teachers Sept. '18 and June '19 Principal, APs and Math Team Lead. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During PTA, SLT, Parent-Teacher Conf., - overseen by APs, Principal, GC and Teacher Leaders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math Department Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, we will assess the students' mid-term and mock regents taken in Feb 2019. We will use baseline assessments in Sept. '18 to measure progress mid-year, March '19 and end of year, June '19. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Marking Period grades, Mid-term exams, Mock Regents exam results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework for Great Schools Elements and the LE survey from 2017-18, show a steep increase in effective leadership, staff morale, and satisfaction with our PD plan and execution for the year. We still need to greater differentiate and focus on fewer pedagogical strategies, allowing for greater depth and mastery. We need to further develop our curriculum and school-wide strategies across grades 6-12, and continue our pursuit for a greater use of game/project based learning, especially in the US. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through effective feedback in 3d there will be a 3% increase in scores for CR in ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In collaboration with the UFT Representative, the school leader will establish a PD Committee that represents the diversity of the teachers at the school. The committee will work to develop a cohesive PD plan that meets the needs of all of the teachers. School faculty At the end of each PD opportunity, participants will have the opportunity to offer feedback and reflection which will be used to inform future professional learning opportunities. Teachers will have the opportunity for inter-visitations to other classrooms of teachers who are implementing problem based learning with authenticity. We will norm as a staff what each Domain rating looks and sounds like that is evidence based. Our PCT will be leading workshops that target teachers that need assistance with various Danielson Domains. School faculty School faculty School Faculty Ongoing throughout the year Ongoing throughout the year Ongoing throughout the year Principal, PD committee Principal, PD committee Principal, PD committee Jan. '19 Principal June '19 APs PD committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During PTA, SLT, Parent-Teacher Conf., emails and newsletters - overseen by PC, GC, APs and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Committee and partnership with Institute of Play Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of teachers will have created a project/game based unit that will be peer evaluated. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson rubric, Institute of Play guidelines, peer evaluation worksheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017/18 LE Survey showed an exponential increase with school/community ties satisfaction. School leaders, teachers and parents have worked together to build a greater sense of community and school pride, which resulted in higher ratings as measured in the annual school survey. We need to continue and build on the practices that began in September 2016. We will continue to practice constant communication, transparency and accessibility to our parent/student body. As compared to 2016-17, there will also be three additional parent/family events and/or workshops either related to Health/Wellness, College, Scholarships, Financial Literacy, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, by practicing constant communication, transparency and accessibility to our parent/student body, we will increase parent involvement at events by 5% and host an additional 3 events. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase Participation in extracurricular activities, including but not limited to sports, theater, student gov't and other after school activities. Hold monthly assemblies to build school pride. Students Increase participation in community events, including but not limited to Halloween dance, Thanksgiving Luncheon, Valentines Day dance, student gov't events, theater performances, PTA Auction and Fiesta. Students, faculty, admin., and parents Increase the number of workshops related to Health/Wellness, College, Scholarships, Financial Literacy, etc. and provide targeted outreach to families Students and parents Develop an Advisory curriculum that will assist a sense of pride in students and student accomplishments at the school. students Check in every 2 months of the school year Ongoing through the year Ongoing though the year Ongoing though the year Principal, APs , teachers PTA After school activities. Student Gov't , teachers, PTA, admin and parents. Student Gov't, teachers, PTA, admin, parents, and Community Partnerships Teachers and admin. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Manhattan Youth, Hudson Guild, Hudson Sailing, IOP Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advisory Committee, partnerships, Guidance dep't and Student Government. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, parent increase in school events by 5% indicated through sign-in sheets and feedback. By February 2019, at least 2 of the additional workshops will be held. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 Parent and Student Learning Environment Survey, Event sign-in sheets, and Skedula log-ins and responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) School wide baseline assessments in argument writing and reading comprehension given in September 2016 and ongoing performance series assessments School wide baseline assessments given in each grade level in September 2016 School wide baseline assessments given in September 2016 School wide baseline assessments given in September 2016 OORS reports, anecdotal information from advisors and parents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Reading recovery, TC writing workshop, Wilson Small group , tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During and after the school day Transitions to Algebra Small group , tutoring During school Targeted support in informational reading Small group, tutoring Targeted support in informational reading Small group, tutoring Counseling, groups Small group, one-one During and after school During and after school During and after school 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 58 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Parent Communication, update contact info. Students will receive school supplies, clothing, books, and other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 28  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 29  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Continued building teacher capacity, well planned PDs, continued observations with immediate feedback 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PD committee assiduously plans and differentiates for all staff members Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Targeted tutoring and supplemental programs to support them academically and socio-emotionally. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). AP courses, continued teacher support to support strong pedagogy 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 31  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Quest to Learn , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Quest to Learn will support parents and students by the following: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 33  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association). This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 2018-19 CEP 34  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; Pot lucks throughout the year; Alumni Students and parents invitation to speak to current upper-classmen; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Quest to Learn in Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the 2018-19 CEP 35  means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds (ESSA) requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 37  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Quest to Learn Borough Manhattan School Number 422 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nick Jurman Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Robert Dixon Teacher/Subject Area Lauren DeSilva/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Raymond Germosen/ENL Related-Service Provider Svetlana Kantorovich Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Tim Jones Coach type here School Counselor Rachelle Vallon Parent Parent Coordinator Kathy Ringrose Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Suzanne Pilsbury/Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 40  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 675 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.67% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Quest to Learn uses a running record format to assess our ELLs literacy skills. Students are given graded readings from the TCRWP to determine their optimal reading levels; additionally, students are also rated on the SOLOM Oral Matrix scale to assess their ability to speak/listen. The data from the running records give us valuable insight into a student's ability to decode, answer questions, and make inferences about a text. The records from the SOLOM Scale provide insight into a student's ability to produce academic utterances. For example, students that are unable to produce nominalizations may possess basic interpersonal communication skills, but they will not be able to consistently produce academic utterances. This data is amazingly helpful because it provides the foundation to differentiate instruction by process and content; additionally, the data allows ENL teachers to meet students acquisition needs by properly aligning content with developmental sequence and stage. 2018-19 CEP 41  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly ELL meetings and PD 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our program is stand alone ENL with native language support, so we evaluate our program by meeting AYP for ELLs. In consultation with our school's UFT Representative and the faculty, our school has choosen the progress framework. By this standard, we have had some success. Most of our ELLs enter with high level proficiency and become proficient within the school year. We do have a few students that don't fit this pattern and we are working with our special education teachers to meet their test taking needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Parent Outreach, after school enrichment, period 6 AIS 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns in the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT show that Quest serves a predominantly Expanding ELL population. Of the 18 ELLs enrolled at Quest: 10 are Expanding; 4 are Transitioning; and 4 are Entering. Two of the four students in the Entering category are newcomers that have only arrived in the past 2 months. The other students in the Entering category also receive special education services and struggle in their L!. The four students in the Transitioning category were able to advance from the Entering category in a year. The data patterns in the 6 th and 9 th grade show that students typically enter Quest with an Expanding level of English proficiency. The 8 th grade data shows that the few students that don't enter 6 th grade in the Expanding category are able to reach advanced proficiency within 2 years. The only students that are not advanced in the 8 th grade are both newcomers. As a whole, the data reflects the effectiveness of a small ENL program where most students have reached at least an intermediate level of proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly ELL meetings, PD Comm and Planning, Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We use a standalone ENL push-in/pull-out model. The ENL teachers pull students out of non-core classes to deliver ENL instruction. The ENL teachers also push into core classes to support ELLs and meet the required number of mandated minutes. The students are grouped heterogeeneously but there pull out classes only span two contiguous grades. For example, 6 th and 7 th grade ELLs receive pullout instruction together regardless of proficiency. The only exception is our 12 th grade ELL with an IEP who meets with the 10 th and 11 th graders. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the pull-out ESL instructional program students are grouped heterogeneously. ELLs receive New York State ENL mandated allotments of instruction time based on proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging middle school ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL per week. These students receive direct ENL instruction for 3 periods each week. An ENL teacher pushes into their core English class to deliver support 3 times a week. Transitioning and Expanding middle school ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. These students receive direct ENL instruction for 1 period a week and receive push in instruction for 2 periods a week. The ENL teachers meet with content teachers to determine the core classes that ENL teachers should push into. Entering high school ELLs receive 540 and Emerging high school ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL per week. These students receive direct ENL instruction for 3 periods each week. An ENL teacher pushes into their core English class to deliver support 3 times a week. Transitioning and Expanding high school ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. These students receive direct ENL instruction for 1 period a week and receive push in instruction for 2 periods a week. The ENL teachers meet with content teachers to determine the core classes that ENL teachers should push into. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area skills and knowledge are reinforced focusing on conventions of grammar and usage. Materials used include manipulatives, realia, ENL video programs, SRA ELL Photo Library, Dolch List-Grade level appropriate sight words, ELL handbook from Reading Street; Read Write, Edit and Listen, and the Common Core Clinics. In addition, instruction includes graphic organizers, TPR (Total Physical Response), and teacher modeling. Scaffolding techniques and differentiation by process and content are also used to help ELLs access content. In the push-in program model, the ENL is a co-teacher. Content knowledge is planned and covered with a mainstream classroom teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school administers summative language assessments each trimester for middle school and each semester for high school. The assessments are created to assess progress and skill level in both languages and all four modalities. The data from the assessments is analyzed to find areas of strength and weakness among each student, and used to create instructional plans to target areas of weakness. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Learning Strategists, special educators, provide small group sessions to teach basic skills in math, reading. Cooperative learning and peer teaching facilitate comprehension and language development. Extended time ENL classes could be offered to learn vocabulary, basic phonic skills, and writing. An ENL newcomer program to address basic literacy skills is available. The student sets his/her own pace. The ENL teacher uses various strategies, such as TPR (Total Physical Response), role-play, language experience charts, music, art, pictures, and real objects to facilitate understanding. b) Cooperative learning and peer teaching support ELLs in school less than three years. An ENL Newcomer program is available during the school day to learn vocabulary, basic phonics skills, and emergent reading and writing. c) When a student is classified as promotion in doubt (PID), administration and teachers convene to create supports for the student in question. Students may benefit from extra curricular activities, a PBIS, after school tutoring, or alternative assessments. 2018-19 CEP 43  d) When a student is classified as promotion in doubt (PID), administration and teachers convene to create supports for the student in question. Students may benefit from extra curricular activities, a behavior modification program (PBIS), after school tutoring, or alternative assessments. e) Cooperative learning and peer teaching support former ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL and Learning Strategist’s classroom language is modified to be more accessible to all ELLs and students with IEPs. Both teachers rely on visuals, pictures, graphs, and organizers to support scaffolding. Pictures also provide discussion topics, facilitate role-play, and help make abstract ideas concrete. In pre-teaching activities, teachers model how to use texts and activate or provide prior knowledge. Teachers also use story-maps to identify literary elements, such as plot, setting, characters, etc. ELLs and students with IEPs are programmed in an inclusive environment where there is no distinction between them and mainstream students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school carefully programs students into ICT classes so students have access to their content and special education teachers. The teachers work together to differentiate instruction by process and content so that all students have access to instruction. I 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There are various intervention programs at this school that provide additional support for ELLs in math and other content areas. We offer a morning tutoring hour where students are invited to come before school and complete work assigned by their teachers, which is intended to target areas of weakness. Students also have opportunities before and after school to engage in math intervention with our learning strategist. Also, the instructional program that we have implemented school-wide is deeply differentiated and accounts for many intervention opportunities within the regular school day. Systems thinking (our instructional focus) provides many opportunities for students to engage with different texts on a wide variety of reading levels. Small groups meet with teachers on a regular basis, and opportunities for small group instruction are built into every class throughout the course of our instructional day. This ensures that our ELLs are receiving the linguistic support and the content support that they require. We also have learning strategists who push into many classes in order to provide additional conference time for our special education students and other students who need it most. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Every year at Quest to Learn, ENL programs and offerings are examined and assessed based on student need, teacher availability, scheduling, and parent choice. It has been found that parents prefer the current freestanding ENL program in place. In addition, we would like to offer an afterschool program for parents hoping to learn English and gain English Langthis will be considered as budgetary opportunities arise. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No previously set in place program aimed at servicing ELLs will be discontinued for the current school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to any and all school programs. They are members of our school's sports teams, and have the freedom to choose after school and enrichment courses that are appealing to them, regardless of linguistic abilities. Enrichment opportunities available to students include art, dance, swimming, parkour, fencing, and gaming. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 44  ELLs have access to software designed for language and vocabulary development. The building library has audio versions of several books. In addition to software, there are laptops and iPads exclusively for ELL students. ELL students also learn how to use Google applications, word processing programs, and the Internet in regularly scheduled classes. Materials afforded specifically to ELL’s are visual aids, graphic organizers, ELL textbooks, consumable workbooks, and content area vocabulary cards, Language learning games, puzzles, translation dictionaries and manipulatives. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Support is delivered in several ways including: teacher translation; student to student translation; literacy tools such as books, picture dictionaries, and translation dictionaries are available for student use to enrich content and make it comprehensible. Other content area teachers, the parent coordinator, and administrative staff are available to translate or deliver instruction where appropriate and as necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to ELLs’ grade levels. Resources and instruction are then differentiated or modified to match the students’ needs and level of background knowledge to meet grade level expectations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have access to software designed for language and vocabulary development. The building library has audio versions of several books. In addition to software, there are laptops and iPads exclusively for ELL students. ELL students also learn how to use Google applications, word processing programs, and the Internet in regularly scheduled classes. Materials afforded specifically to ELL’s are visual aids, graphic organizers, ELL textbooks, consumable workbooks, and content area vocabulary cards, Language learning games, puzzles, translation dictionaries and manipulatives. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When newly enrolled ELLs are identified prior to the beginning of the school year, they are given an opportunity to meet classroom teachers beforehand. Also, ELLs and their parents have an opportunity to speak with administrative staff, ESL staff, and the parent coordinator about the school, program offerings, curriculum, and grade level expectations. Newly enrolled newcomer ELLs are paired up with one or two “buddy” students with the same native language who can help them through translation and social development and transitions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 45  ELL teachers are regularly invited to attend district and Network training sessions specifically directed toward the effective instruction of ELLs. ESL teachers are routinely encouraged to attend trainings by the administration and are given the opportunity to turnkey relevant information to classroom teachers and support staff in common prep meetings or during regular staff interaction. ELL teachers are regularly invited to attend district and Network training sessions specifically directed toward the effective inclusion of Common Core standards into instruction of ELLs. ESL teachers are routinely encouraged to attend trainings by the administration and are given the opportunity to turnkey relevant information to classroom teachers and support staff in common prep meetings or during regular staff interaction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school’s guidance counselor provides support for ELLs transitioning from elementary school. She routinely discusses our programs and all available options with all transitioning students, including ELLs and those with special needs. Students are also invited to Open Houses. To implement the 15% for all teachers and 50% for ENL teacher training, our staff attends a variety of workshops offered by the Department of English Language learners that cover best practices for instruction of ELLs. Additionally, classroom teachers attend workshops that increase student engagement in the classroom; review best practices for vocabulary-building, enhanced reading comprehension, and build students’ stamina for writing. Jane Cascone, one of the Pupil Accounting Secretaries, keeps records relating to professional development in teacher files in the main office; in addition, all teachers keep and maintain their own professional development records for their respective certifications. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to provide annual individual meetings for ELL parents, the ESL Coordinator first runs an RELC report. The RELC report displays the names of ELLs enrolled in the school. Fortunately, Quest to Learn only has 18 ELLs so we are able to meet with each students' parents individually. We meet with parents at the end of the trimester for middle school students and at the end of the semester for high school students. These meetings occur in addition to the mandated DOE scheduled meetings. The RELC report also indicates the students' home languages. We are able to arrange translation services from the translation and interpretation unit in the home language indicated on the HLIS. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement at Quest to Learn includes, but is not limited to participation in monthly PTA meetings. Parents are notified of meetings via our relay, newsletter, which is published in both English and parent’s preferred language. Parents of newly enrolled ELLs are invited to parent orientation meetings in order to establish and maintain communication regarding their child’s progress in school. Contact and communication with parents is also established through our parent coordinator who reaches out and talks extensively with parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to school at the beginning of the year for an open school night. Teachers meet with parents in classrooms to explain the grade expectations, the curriculum in each subject area, the grading system, school policies regarding class work, supplies, homework, and discipline. 2018-19 CEP 46  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 47 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nicholas Jurman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 49  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M422 School Name: Quest to Learn Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration home language surveys are administered to determine the parent's preferred language. In addition, verbal inquiries are made during Open House to determine parents' language preferences.Japanese, Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish are the primary native languages spoken by Quest Families; however, families have opted to receive communication in English. All of our families are English proficient with the exception of 10 students. Of those 10, 7 speak Spanish at home, and another family speaks Chinese. All communication is sent in those families native languages. There are also 2 families that speak ASL. One of those families has a member that is deaf and mute. The family uses a phone service to contact the school and we arrange for ASL translators. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 50 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Chinese, ASL, and English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual Handbooks, The Parent Relay Email(which contains all pertinent information like calendars, conference dates and sign-ups,school news, procedures, and special program offerings), and After-School Announcements. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school has the mandated parent-teacher conferences and a curriculum night. Informally, parents are often contacted by the Guidance Counselors or the school Deans. The ESL Coordinator, Rob Dixon, runs an ATS BIOU report and filters for home language codes. The filtered report is given to the Parent Coordinator, Kathy Ringrose. The Parent Coordinator uses 2018-19 CEP 51  the report to reach out to new families and update the school's list of parents that have requested translated communication. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Welcome Poster is prominently displayed in the Main Office. We have a waiting area in the Main Office where parents are greeted by Suzanne Pilsbury, a Pupil Accounting Secretary, who shows LEP parents a language ID card and then gives them a translated Parent's Bill of Rights and a Language Access Guide before contacting the ESL Coordinator. The security desk also has a Language ID Card and a Welcome Poster. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We conduct a parent survey during curriculum night and parents are always free to leave suggestions or comments in any language on our website. The comments go to an account set up by our technology director where they are forwarded to the ESL and Parent Coordinators. 2018-19 CEP 52 
