2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M423 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR EXCELLENCE AND INNOVATION Principal: TYONA WASHINGTON 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Excellence and Innovation 9-12 310600011423 School Number (DBN): M423 650 Academy Street, New York, NY 10034 212-569-1022 Phone Number: 212-569-1190 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Maria Espaillat Mespaillat2@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: TyonaWashington Jorge Arango LucesitaArias Alvino Maria Espaillat SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dominica Nunez Ana Roque Alexis Plascenia Jonathan Rodriguez District Information District 6 Paul Rotondo Geographical District: Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet New York, New York 1002 Superintendent’s Office Address: PRotond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: 212-432-8035 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-705-5856 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tyona Washington Jorge Arango LucesitaArias Alvino Maria Espaillat Dominica Nunez TrinyJimenez Alexia Plasencia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Jonathan Rodriguez CBO Representative, if applicable Rosalba Rivera Nancy Mercedes Alba Miranda Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melba Campbell RosalbaAcosta Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview At the High School for Excellence and Innovation (HSEI) the school’s mission is to educate a unique population of overage high school students and prepare them to compete on equal grounds with their peers in the 21 st century workforce; we do this through Rigorous Instruction in a Supportive Environment that builds strong Family-Community Ties with strong Leadership and Trust through the embodiment of collaboration, connectedness and purpose. We 2018-19 CEP 9  envision our students as scholars who succeeds through individualized academic and social supports. Every stakeholder is accountable and responsible for upholding the school’s mission and vision. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Launched in 2009, The High School for Excellence and Innovation (HSEI) is one of only two high schools in New York City, which exclusively serves overage eighth graders. Matriculating students are on average, 16 years old, and at least two years behind grade level when entering ninth grade at HSEI for the first time. While traditional transfer high schools target students laterally, from existing high school populations, 100% of HSEI’s students are at risk of aging out of middle school. Students at HSEI were the most academically at-risk students in their respective middle schools. 30% receive special education services and 32% are English Language Learners. 85% of students receive free or reduced lunch. HSEI is in its third year of the Learning Partners Program, with the focus on deepening teacher’s understanding of their practices that yield successful student outcomes through the protocols of Japanese Lesson Study. Teachers collaborate in a risk free environment of examining best practices for all sudents to access rigorous coontent. HSEI partners with Educational Video Center (EVC), where students build on their literacy skills through producing films of their own interest related to improving their community and the world. HSEI partners with an on-site physical, dental, and mental health clinic- Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. Students have free access to these services and return to class, and is a vital resource to families. Fresh Prep, an organization that provides in class coaches to provide regents preparation for Global History and ELA with rap. Inwood Community Collective provides free SAT prep classes. Workshops of parent interest to bolster parent/student relationships are conducted monthly through our Saturday Parent Academy.. The Neighborhood grant in provides thirty-one students with paid academic and social learning opportunities through internships with local businesses and organizations. Through collaboration of our co-location status, HSEI established in conjunction with Intermediate School 52 and Inwood Early College a campus wide male and female sports teams. 2017-2018, High School for Excellence and Innovation offers Advanced Placement courses under New York City Department of Education's Advanced Placement for All (AP for ALL) initiative. All students including students with Individual Education Plans (IEPs) and English New Language Learners (ENL) students are enrolled in these rigorous courses. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 22% receive special education services and 49% are English New Language Learners. The English Department uses the literacy strategies: making predictions, making connections, making inferences, visualizing, questioning, determining importance and synthesis to develop students’ abilities to analyze and explain their understanding. 60% of students are overage and receive double weighed support . Differentiation of teaching strategies, differentiation of student work products and differentiation of tasks will be implemented to provide diverse learners with access to rigorous content. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Rigorous Instruction For the 2017-2018 school year, HSEI worked on strengthening teacher teams through building capacity by increasing the number of model teachers, as well as aligning the school’s focus to plan through vertical and horizontal alignment as a result of our processes of following the problem of practice model. For the 2018-2019 school year, HSEI is continuing to work on curriculum alignment as part of the AP for All program, both departmentally and inter-departmentally, as well as through horizontal and vertical alignment as part of the foci to increase rigor and prepare all students to take AP classes, and for college and career readiness. As a result of our English New Language Learner (ENL/ ELL) student population increasing to 50%, vocabulary and student-to-student discussion have become the foci for the 2018-2019 school year. This will allow students to deepen their understanding of content and skills. Collaborative Teachers For the 2017-2018 school year, the foci was on strengthening teacher teams through building capacity by increasing model teachers to two, as well as having a Peer-collaborative and Master teacher to support the school community. For the 2018-2019 school year, the foci are around aligning and adapting the curriculum to meet the needs of all of our students, including our ENL/ELL, Special Education, and students who are excelling. Additionally, differentiating professional development through the use of Model Teachers and coaches by providing targeted support to new and struggling teachers as well as develop inter-departmental visitation to highlight best practices. The Master, Peer-collaborative, and Model Teachers will host visits as part of their lab classrooms to showcase best practices around our foci for this year. Supportive Environment For the 2017-2018 school year had the school community work on targeted partnerships which offered our students and families wrap-around services. Organization such as East Side House Settlement, Columbia Presbyterian, Inwood Community Coalition, and the Jewish Board resulted in an increase in students academics and attendance, and family engagement. For 2018-2019, the foci is to create a robust College and Career readiness program for students and families by partnering with East Side House Settlement, Columbia Presbyterian, and Inwood Community Coalition for student and family support through paid internships for students, Learning to Work for students, after-school tutoring, parent and family workshops, as well as job interest and college trips. Strong Families and Community Ties High School for Excellence and Innovation garners strategic partnerships that caters to the needs of key stakeholders- students, teachers, and parents. Teachers benefit from external coaches from ReDesign, Eskolta, and Learning Alliance that use highly effective research based best practices, including curriculum development that is aligned with both the school goals and skill within the department. These organizations prepare weekly and bi-weekly schedules in collaboration with the leadership team to support school wide goals and to provide targeted support to teachers. In addition, to enhance extended time learning and during school, Leadership & Trust Stakeholders are regularly consulted formally and informally regarding the viability of school wide initiatives. Trust is evident through honest reflections and evaluations at key points of the school year through- mid and endings of trimesters driven by “check-ins” with students, parents and teachers. Voices are heard through surveys, Town Hall, 2018-19 CEP 11  School Leadership Teams, weekly cabinet meetings, Teacher Team Meetings, Joint Community Based Organization and Department of Education’s staff meetings. For the 2018-2019 school year, leadership and committee membership has been extended to all staff members to provide opportunities to build upon their leadership capabilities outside of the classroom. In addition, staff have been encouraged to seek out professional development outside of the building to enhance their pedagogical practice and leadership skills. First name basis fosters an environment of inclusiveness and respectful camaraderie. Ideas are voiced, implemented and assessed. Staff trust the expertise of their colleagues. Students applaud success of themselves and their peers. Parents offer testimonies of appreciation of their child’s “turn around” towards focusing on school and extracurricular activities. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M423 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 201 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 3 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 47.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 87.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 50% 27% 29.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 113 112 70.2% 0.5% 21.4% 10.4% 0.5% 0.5% 0 25% 5.5 N/A N/A 58% 45% 54.0% 2% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s instructional goals emerged from feedback we received from our quality review in 2015-2016 as well as PPO visits for the 2017-2018 school year. Based on the feedback provided, student-to-student discussions using academic vocabulary needs to be increased and encouraged in all classrooms, as well as providing students opportunities to ask rigorous questions. We also need to continue to work on articulating how we are preparing students to be college and career ready through rigorous engagement. Therefore, our school has been working vigorously at aligning the use of resources, support and organizational decisions to its instructional goals, long range plans and students learning needs. We have adopted and is currently piloting an action research based Japanese Lesson Study whereby teachers are called to shift their thinking about instruction- rather than teaching what the content dictates- the teacher plans are based on what the students need to know. As a priority for the unique population of students that we serve we tap on our in house community based partner (CBO) partner East Side House to not only help us in ensuring that all our student’s social emotional needs are being met, but that their college and/or career needs are also being identified and met within the safe and secure learning environment we have created. In addition, coherent structures to support effective teaching practices and student achievement have become organized, as evidenced by deconstructing standards, aligning curriculum according to targeted skills and effective teaching through actionable feedback garnered from observations and low inference feedback done by teachers and their peers. Thus, the deliberate teaching of targeted skills and adherence to the Danielson Framework for teaching 3b and 3d are at the heart of our global skill of developing argument in Mathematics, English Language Arts, Social Studies and Science classes. English : For the 2018-2019 school year, the ELA team will continue to implement the Japanese Lesson Study by creating tiered support across grade levels and in the classrooms in building the skill of connecting the identified central idea of a text with supporting details to provide a thoughtful analysis of the text. Within the Japanese Lesson Study, the skill for Freshmen will focus on identifying the central idea, Sophomores will focus on the skill of identifying the central idea and citing evidence to support to support the central idea, Juniors and Seniors will focus on the skill of identifying the central idea, citing evidence, and applying literary devices to it, with seniors having more complex texts and more thorough analysis. In addition, the ELA team is partnering with the English as a New Language (ENL) team to align curriculum to support students in their English language acquisition. As a result of partnering with the Learning Partners Program, as well as the item analysis from previous regents, the ELA team realized students are struggling with identifying the Central Idea and making inferences. Through Japanese Lesson Study and partnering with coaches, the team will identify strategies to support the students, many who are English Language Learners, in accessing rigorous texts, identifying the Central Idea, and making inferences. Student-2018-19 CEP 14  to-student conversations through the use of prompts and sentence stems, and questioning, students will build on their language skills in reading, writing, speaking, and listening, enabling students to dive deeper into the readings and increase skills to prepare for College and Career. Social Studies: The 2018-2019 school year will focus on Common Core Standard R2: Determining central idea of a text and making connections from the text. Based upon assessments given in the 2017-2018 school year and inquiry through the Japanese Lesson Study, it has been determined that students struggle with identifying the central idea and making connections. Data from the 2016-2017 school year indicated a minor shift in improvement, but a focus on these two skills needs to be continued. Additional skills that will be implemented into the curriculum will be: determining importance, questioning, drawing conclusions/making inferences, supported through the use of the RACES rubric. The rubric will be used as a tool to provide feedback, especially for the baseline and performance task activities. Collaboration with coaches from ReDesign and Learning Alliance will take place to assist in creating a rigorous learning environment and make differentiation visible by identifying best practices and strategies. Curriculum will be reflected upon and revised based upon the data and learned pedagogical practices from the Japanese Lesson Study and collaboration within the department and inter-visitation to increase student achievement and mastery of identified skills. Math: For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be review of relevant data, including, but not limited to: IEP goals and mandated, summative and formative assessments, along with parent and student requests in regards to regent requirement need and 8th grade scores for the incoming Freshman. The 2015-2016 school year marked the first time the Math department implemented the Japanese Lesson Study, and based upon this experience, as well as results from the 2017-2018 Japanese Lesson Study cycles, the team realized the focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be math vocabulary acquisition while delving deeper into mathematical reasoning. The tool identified to measure success of student mastery will be the Math RACE rubric, and the rubric itself will be revised to include the vocabulary frequency used by students in the classroom. In addition, curriculum is being revised to create more open-ended tasks to provide students the opportunity to deepen their understanding of mathematics and metacognitive thinking. Collaboration with the coaches from ReDesign and Learning Alliance will be an integral part of our planning to ensure rigorous instruction and visible differentiation is taking place in the classroom. New this year will be an inquiry project into the Habit of Minds and Growth Mindset to shift student thinking about mathematics and their social-emotional development to create independent learner and thinkers. Science: The goals of the science Department for the 2018-2019 school year is to promote and enhance scientific knowledge and problem solving skills. To this end, we will strive to mentor our students and heighten their scientific literacy. We plan to continue focusing on the scientific method through the skills of observation, experimentation, data interpretation, analysis, and critical thinking. The science department conducted a series of Japanese lesson study in the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years. The skills we focused on were to identify the main idea of a text and to paraphrase. Students were then asked to make connections to their reading. The result of our action research showed that students experienced difficulty in explaining what they were reading. However, most students were able to identify the main idea and make connections with their text. As a result of the data collected, teachers in the Science Department will continue to use methods to improve student writing skills. 2018-19 CEP 15  In our planning we will continue to use well-designed learning tasks and activities that require complex thinking. Our lessons will show modifications, scaffolding and challenging problems that require students to justify their thinking and to reflect on their learning experiences. Our lessons will focus on student collaboration and group participation. We will also design manageable tasks that are within the proficiency of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, our goal is that by the end of the school year, students will increase regents pass rates by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Japanese lesson study will be used as a strategy to strengthen teacher teams around developing uniform practices that yield deep understandings of skills and student's metacognitive skills. Teachers of ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies 87% of students are overage and receive double weighted support . Differentiation of teaching strategies, differentiation of student work products and differentiation of tasks will be implemented to provide diverse learners with access to rigorous content. Teachers of ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies Principal, Model Teachers and Lead Teachers. Principal, Model Teachers and Lead Teachers. Each trimester one cycle of lesson study will be executed on a rotational basis. Lesson Study cycles will begin in September for Trimester 1, December for Trimester 2, and March for Trimester 3. Each trimester one cycle of lesson study will be executed on a rotational basis. Lesson Study cycles will begin in September for Trimester 1, December for Trimester 2, and March 2018-19 CEP 17 Introduction of blended learning and technology as a way to differentiate and support all stakeholders in the academic and social-emotional success of students. All stakeholders: staff, students, parents,a nd community representatives SPOC, Tech point person, lead teachers, model teachers, Coaches, Principal, and CUNY Intern for Trimester 3. Introduce technology in September to staff. Check in monthly on progress of each staff member to see what programs they are using, how they are using it, and supports needed. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family conferences, workshops, town halls, memos, one-to-one family meetings with individual teachers, Guidance Counselor, and/or advisor will take place throughout the year. In addition, East Side House Settlement our CBO, The Community Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator will meet to identify ways to inform families of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards, which may include bringing in guest speakers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coaches, Lead Teachers, Integrated Collaborative Teachers, Datacation/ Skedula, Achieve 3000, iLearn, Collections, Hochman training, Teaching Matters Inc. workshops, purchase/ update technology, 90 minutes of Professional Collaborative Learning, 35 minutes of Other Professional Work for case conferencing. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our identified midpoint of reflection will take place every three to four weeks per trimester. For the 2018-2019 school year, those days are expected to be: 10/22/18, 12/7/18, 2/1/19, 3/29/19, 5/13/19, 6/26/19. The school will use IO 2018-19 CEP 18  Education to print out data reports in regards to student progress, school culture, attendance, and other key pieces of information that will allow the school community to identify areas of need. In addition, teachers will conference with students bi-weekly regarding goals setting. Administration will meet with individual and department Leads twice a month to engage in data analysis of student work products and ADVANCE data to create interim goals that will lead to the attainment of our school wide goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration will meet with individual and department Leads to engage in data analysis of student work products and ADVANCE data to create interim goals that will lead to the attainment of our school wide goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Mental Health Readiness Assessment was a collaboration between the Social Worker, Crisis Intervention Specialist, Parent Coordinator, Advisor and various support staff. 39% of students were served in comparison to last year. In accordance to the data relationships, sexual health, domestic violence, housing and employment was of top concern for our population. In accordance to the School Surveys , students felt they will need additional support in post-secondary education and assistance. Teachers felt that the data presented during the year was useful and would like to see more enrichment programs for next year. Parent engagement has increased in accordance to our Saturday family Town halls. Parents are also notified when there child is absent on a frequent basis. Additionally, the Dean of Students and Social Worker met once a week in 2017-2018 to discuss individual student need and identified targeted strategies to assist the student being discussed. For the 2018-2019 school year the goal will be to disseminate the information gathered and strategies identified to the staff in an effort to further the support the identified students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to host parent workshops based on a parent interest survey, and increase parent engagement by 10%. Workshops will be around several topics, such as: improving attendance, supporting students at home, raising teenagers, academic requirements, college and career readiness and others once a month. Other Town halls will pertain to the following; housing, citizenship resources/classes and family mediation services; these will be held one to two times per trimester for a total of 6 Town halls. Facilitation of attendance strategies for parents whose children are attending but want to increase (i.e. reward systems) will take place in small group and one-to-one meetings as needed based on the needs of the students and families. The goal of this initiative is to increase attendance by 5%. Robust Enrichment Programs such as basketball, debate teams and post-secondary programs will be implemented through our CBO and Mental Health Consultant will take place throughout the school year. The Dean of Students and Social worker will send weekly updates to all staff in regards to student progress and strategies and interventions being implemented. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Food Pantry Program Families Oct.-June CBO/Parent Be Proud Be Responsible Program Students Sept.- June CBO/ NY Coordinator/ Community Coordinator English Classes Program LIT Program Mentoring Program 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Presbyterian Families Nov.-June CBO/ Teacher Students Sept. -June CBO Students Sept.-June School Student Support Team (SSST) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held monthly, as well as individual parent meetings that will take place throughout the year. Home visits will also take place to support parents and engage them in the education of their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community Schools Grant, Fair Student Funding, Funding from CBO for initiatives, Fund-raisers by PTA to provide additional attendance incentives and initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mentoring program will have six benchmarks to indicate progress for the students in the program, and those will be each time report cards are provided. Workshop facilitators will utilize weekly attendance sheets to identify attendance trends and there will be three benchmarks, one per trimester to determine progress and reflect on trends. The Food Pantry Program, English Classes Program, Be Proud Be Responsible Program, and LIT Program will have one benchmark per trimester to determine progress towards meeting the specified goals. In February, the data sorter will be used to identify growth students have made in regards to attendance and academics, and mentors will report on any qualitative data they have gathered through their meetings with their mentees. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. There will be three instruments to assess progress; All workshop facilitators will have attendance sheets weekly. Director will utilize the Data Sorter from New Visions to determine programmatic impact and implementation, Advisors will receive updates from teachers to identify if students who are participants have increased academically and social emotionally. Mentors will have mentees complete a daily progress tracker in one identified class, and meet with their mentee once a week and complete a conference form. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams have been established as a critical core function of the school. Collaborations in vertical and horizontal teams are viewed as “safe spaces” for teachers to learn and grow. This process helps to generate synergy around discussing best practices, individual and targeted groups of students and decision making regarding pedagogy. Teachers have also established protocols of looking at student work. As a result of analyzing feedback from QR and informal and formal observations, the school needs to ensure all departments are engaged in uniform assessments. Teams have begun to engage in unifying collaborative approaches through Japanese Lesson Study. Teachers have embraced this practice and have cycled at least once using this protocol through 100% of teacher teams. Based upon the Quality Review, NYC School Survey, IO Education data, and formal and informal observations by Administration and Coaches, student-to-student conversations and students asking of high level questions of each other is a priority need that is to be addressed for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of School year 2018-2019, 25% of class time will be devoted to student-to-student discussion and the questioning of peers. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In August all teachers will attend a summer PD on the new Common Core Curriculum Teachers will tailor the common core curriculum materials to ensure there are scaffolds and ramp up materials and strategies During the school year, teachers in each department will engage in three lesson study cycles. These cycles focus on an identified skill, with student skill level determined through a baseline in which the team then creates one lesson to be presented by one member of the team. Once the lesson has been presented, there is a debriefing in which student work is analyzed to determine the success of the lesson, as well as revisions to be made and next steps for follow up lessons. Unit plans will be revised based on lessons learned. Teachers will also analyze student work products and provide constructive feedback to strengthen teacher practice and improve student outcomes At the end of each trimester, teachers will engage in a consultancy protocol to present the strategies their departments tried and receive feedback from other departments. Additionally, Teams will inter-visit with their Learning Partner-East Brooklyn Community High School 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades 9-12, SWD and ELLs September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads Teachers and students Sept.- June Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads Grades 9-12, SWD and ELLs September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, LP Partner, Coaches, Department Heads How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A select group of teachers will make home visits to the parents of students in order to discuss with them ways to support their child in their academic career. Parent workshops and meetings will take place monthly to inform parents of what is taking place in the school and provide strategies to support their children at home. The CBO will be responsible for this initiative, along with the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  Resources that will be leveraged are grants and federal funds. First, additional staff will support the goal in the areas of collaborative teaching. Additional PD time on Monday and Tuesday (OPW) will be used to support teacher collaboration. Expert coaches will support lead teachers and targeted teachers in need of specific pedagogical support. Schedules will be adjusted to serve the needs of all students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place three times a year (December, March and June). Data such as scholarship reports of each content area will be examined against our school wide target of an increased regents pass rate by five percent. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data such as scholarship reports of each content area will be examined against our school wide target of increase of five percent. Regents pass rate will increase by five percent. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Distributive leadership and maximizing resources are two areas of strengths as evidenced by an increase of Model Teacher from 2 to 3, 2 teachers entering Leadership Programs, one teacher was accepted into the Wallace Fellowship program. For the 2018-2019 school year, we want to increase in the effectiveness of academic teams that result in a 5% increase of regents passing rate and graduation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, the goal is to increase student attendance by 5% and demonstrate this through a 5% increase of passing rates on regents exams. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Mentoring Program in which staff members mentor an identified group of students. Targeted tutoring support for English Language Acquisition 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who have failed 2 or more classes and have an attendance rate of 65-70% Entering and Emerging English Language Learners October 2108- June 2019 Dean, Admin in Training, Teachers, Principal ENL Team, Principal Mid September 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Community School and School Leadership Team meetings will take place once a month to provide information and receive feedback from parents and other stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coaches from ReDesign, Learning Alliance, and CEI will work with the entire school community, as well as one-on-one meeting with identified developing Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. With the help of the SLT team, Advisors and PTA president, HSEI is dedicated to providing 10 consistent community linkages/ outreach activities such as 1) Collaboration with United Healthcare, Inwood Community Services and other resources during the following events (Parent Townhalls, Parent Teacher Conferences and Community School Forums 2) Consistent referrrals from Community Day vendors and resources3) Saturday Parent ESL Classes 4) Healthy Living workshops 5) Financial Literacy workshops 6)Housing assistance and referrals from the Department of Homeless Services 7) Family Appreciation Dinner 8) LIT Program intervention Services yearly 9) Family Mediation services from the Jewish Board 10) First- Aid Training classes. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Based Organization is East Side House Settlement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions, datasorter, Skedula, Needs assessment surveys for all stakeholders, and Community School forum. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of relevant data – including, but not limited to: IEP Goals/Mandates, Summative and Formative Assessments – including baselines, and progress and report card scores. Parent/student requests will also be considered. Review of relevant data – including, but not limited to: IEP Goals/Mandates, Summative and Formative Assessments – including baselines, and progress and report card scores. Parent/student requests will also be considered. Review of relevant data – including, but not limited to: IEP Goals/Mandates, Summative and Formative Assessments – including baselines, and progress and report card scores. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Saturday & after school tutoring sessions are offered to all students. Identified students receive ACHIEVE 3000 reading support in pull out small groups during the day. Saturday & PM school Math tutoring sessions are offered to all students including students with IEPs and ESL students. Targeted students will receive AIS after school in science content, skills and vocabulary through a Reading intervention program-Reading Apprentice. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group tutoring After-school and Saturday school Small group tutoring PM and Saturday School Small group tutoring PM and Saturday School 2018-19 CEP 31  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent/student requests will also be considered. Review of relevant data – including, but not limited to: IEP Goals/Mandates, Summative and Formative Assessments – including baselines, and progress and report card scores. Parent/student requests will also be considered. Review of relevant data – including, but not limited to: IEP/Goals/Mandates, counseling notes, attendance/lateness data, and behavior & discipline referrals. Small group tutoring PM and Saturday School Targeted students will receive AIS after school in social studies content, skills and vocabulary Small group tutoring During the day and After-school Provide individual and group counseling on a daily or weekly basis for one period to address academic concerns, promotion-in-doubt, family issues which appear as impediments to academic success, academic needs through organizational skills, one-on-one counseling, parent meetings, teacher conferences, discussions of goals, transcripts, progress, college and post secondary goal setting, graduation-in-doubt issues. Support sessions provided to holdovers and students in danger of not passing courses. Every student receives guidance and small group support through advisory classes 2018-19 CEP 32  facilitated by their Student Advisors. Provide individual and group counseling on an as needed basis for one period to address individual and family social emotional concerns. Students are provided with one-to-one counseling, small group counseling, and study skills, time management training as needed. Most services are provided during the school day, but also after school, for students who are facing emotional difficulties which are interfering with their school work, students who are dealing with adjustment issues, both at home and at school, students in academic jeopardy are referred by teachers or students seek out counselors. Speech Related Services Occupational Therapy Physical Therapy 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 32 Through our Social Services Department with ESH and our Linkage with the Department of Homeless Services, we will first direct students to the school's Social Worker as the initial referral. The school's mental health team will also collaborate to identify additional supports and services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). HSEI is a Title I School 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  HSEI is a Title I School 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. HSEI is a Title I School 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly Qualified teachers will be attracted by posting job openings on the new teacher finder website as well as Open Market. Administrators attend job and teaching fairs to meet and interview new teachers (Teaching Fellows) and experienced teachers (ATR’s), and we review resumes submitted on the DOE online Open Market system to find highly qualified teachers. New and untenured teachers are supported by state-required Mentoring, professional development, and coaches to meet required new teacher PD hours for state licensing, and our connections and programs affiliated with local college and universities (so they can earn required credits for certification). Veteran teachers are offered leadership opportunities and programs to support their continued growth within the school, and have a voice in school leadership through school-wide positions and as part of the SLT team. All staff will participate in ongoing Professional Development activities both within and outside of the school building. Some of these professional development activities will be facilitated by our Network coaches. Current staff will receive on-going professional development to become Highly Qualified. Non tenured staff will receive monthly professional development in their content areas to improve both content knowledge and learn best practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High Quality and Meaningful Professional Development is at the heart of student mastery of high stakes exams and preparation for college and career. Internal and External (NYC & Network) professional development opportunities are attended by all teachers, classroom personnel and administrators on an ongoing and differentiated basis. Strategies are introduced, implemented and assessed for its effectiveness as per student outcomes. SBO entitles teachers to increase professional development sessions. Teachers and Administrators turnkey the latest research based best practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 36  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use of multiple assessment measures occur in various venues such as teacher teams (vertical & horizontal), School Leadership Team, and Principals cabinet whereby teachers input is embraced. Protocols and norming grades of measures to support feedback from individual and team of teachers are implemented to finalize decisions through mostly consensus and majority rule. Data analysis has been decided upon as the basis for decision making. Teachers participate in finding patterns from global data (Lexile, Baseline, Scholarship, MOSL data, PSAT data, etc.)to real-time data in “exit slips” and looking at Student Work processes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 37 purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 141,111.00 0 11,200.00 0 1,993,586.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 38   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Excellence and Innovation, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. High School for Excellence and Innovation will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; High School for Excellence and Innovation will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School for Excellence and Innovation, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 42  School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people, and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The inclusion of using internship programs, athletics and family engagement to better enhance the attendance of Expanded Learning Programs. Implementing more teacher student led activities/events that will develop better relationships and enhance the trust between teacher / student. In addition, a robust attendance program, including personal phone calls home, home-visits, and one-on-one meetings with parents and students, along with mentorship has been implemented and yielded an increased attendance during the day resulting in positive student academic achievement. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Increase of active Family Participation on a quarterly basis where increments of 10% for each cohort is the goal. The information will be measureable through a tracking system and be analyzed quarterly in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? ELS targets student who are in need of additional support in content and skills in order to pass state exams and credit accumulation in order for students to be academically successful. Parents will be better informed on State Regulations and College and Career paths available to their children through workshops and informational sessions i.e., FAFSA, Guest speakers, etc. Through the use of the Data Sorter, students will be identified by cohorts of students based on attendance percentages and targeted interventions will be provided. Interventions will range by student need as determined by the Data Sorter. A group of students and their families have been identified as needing Tier II intervention, and will receive the support of outside services along with full-time and part-time social workers, provided by the CBO to ensure the health and wellness of students. We will also engage additional outside community resources, for example, 34th Precinct Personnel, Guest speakers, and the CAP program. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal East Side House Settlement 9th-12th Grades Engagement Team East Side House Settlement 2018-19 CEP 46  9th-12th Grades Engagement Team By June 2017, Engagement Team will analyze overall family Engagement data,to use as benchmark. By August 2017, Engagement team will identify and implement strategies to improve the family engagement. September 2017 Engagement team will launch and present plan to all staff and personnel in school community. Data of Family Engagement participation will be analyzed quarterly for assessment and to modify strategies. By June 2018 Engagement Team will review efforts and data Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. East Side House will network within the community to provide opportunities to engage students and parents. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 2018-19 CEP 47  1. 2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Surveys, Community School Forums, Community Day, Male Role Model Day, Brother-to-Brother Program, Sports and recreational activities, NDA Internships, College trips involving both students and parents. 2. Implementing year round workshops targeted for Women Empowerment and needs as after surveying the student population, it was identified that the majority of households are single parent homes with the Mother as the primary caregiver, and additional services needed to be provided. A toolkit of resources will be developed to assist with meeting challenges that are both immediate and long-term. Enhancing mental health services for our community (Students, Parents, Families, and staff members) by Utilizing the Immigrant affairs office to better enhance our student body and families via workshops. Improving Success Mentoring program that includes staff members (as mentors) by strategically planning. Services that are integrated on a daily basis will be offered and available year round for our families. 3.Family Night, Community Forum, Monthly Parent workshops, Community Day There is an open door policy for students and families to raise their concerns and needs. 2018-19 CEP 48  4. Weekly meetings, Data collection, Data monitoring Parent attendance, parent participation(quarterly) Trends Analyze data Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students -Attendance -Parent Engagement -Mental Health Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. East Side House will work with the Parent Coordinator and Community Liaison to identify resources. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2017- June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 1. Rationale:The purpose of the program is to help ensure that students with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other students are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of this school to establish, implement, and sustain a high-quality language instruction program effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. This program is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient students in English language instruction programs. As per regents results, ENL/ELL students struggle with literacy and comprehension in the English regents as evidenced by their low scores on the Task 3, and failure to answer multiple choice question that require students to identify the central idea and make inferences. Upon review of the NYSESLAT, the majority of our ENL/ ELL students show patterns of stagnation in the Transition level and the goal is to support students moving up at least one level.Title III funds will be used to identify, acquire, and upgrade curricula, instructional materials, educational software, and assessment procedures. Our day instructional program is making consistent efforts to comply with mandates for ENL/ESL levels. Our ELL students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding proficiency levels receive ENL instruction through the stand-alone class and co-teaching models in their content area classes ( ELA). English Language Learners at the Commanding proficiency level receive daily exposure to literacy development through content classes that embed the core standards as well as other support classes specific to language development. The after school Title III program is intended to continue the development of students' language acquisition and provide reinforcement and additional time on task for the English as a New Language (ENL) classes offered during the school day. The NYSED certified English to Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) teachers will align lessons with state standards/common core and lessons consisting of activities that foster both social and academic growth. Language functions, structures, usage and vocabulary are part of each lesson. Classes also focus on providing additional support for ENL students in specific content material ( i.e.- math, science, and social studies). The after-school program will take place on Thursdays and Fridays and will be led by Teresa Day from 3:30-5:00PM. In addition, there will be targeted phonics intervention for students who have difficulties with decoding and encoding (whose home language is Arabic, Italian, and Spanish). The program will take place twice a week after the regular school day, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, starting at 3:15PM and ending at 5:00PM, for 10 weeks for a total of 20 sessions. 2. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served:The total number of students to be served was obtained from the Current ELL Report (RELC) from Automate The Schools (ATS) administrative system. As per the English Language Learner Identification results, of the 65 current English Language Learners (ELLs) at our school, 30 (45%) are newcomers who have received 0-3 years of service as English Language Learners; 26 (21%) are middle-year English Language Learners who have received 4-6 years of service. Our focus is to provide Title III 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information services to all of our ELL students with a sharp focus on our long term ELLs, in order to help them become proficient in the English language so they 3. Schedule and duration:The after school program will consist of meetings twice a week ( Thursday and Friday ) ,for one hour and 30 minutes each day , from 3:30pm to 5:00 pm and one Saturday a month for the remainder of 2018-2019 school year ( October to June ), though the number of students may be slightly different . Acquisition will take placed via a blended learning model using computer, group work, audio, and teacher directed activities. Saturday sessions will take place from 9-12:30, and will be led by Sarah Rodriguez. 4.The language of instruction will be English with ENL support. Teresa Day will be teaching the after-school ENL program on Thursdays and Fridays. Sarah Rodriguez will teach the Saturday program for all 9 sessions. 5 . The current number of certified English to Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) teachers is three (3). Teresa Day, Andrew Yee and Joseph Ferrano are NYSED certified teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) K-12. Sarah Rodriguez is a NYSED certified teacher of Spanish 7-12 who is currently enrolled in a graduate program where she will obtain a Masters of Science in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL). . Melba Campbell, a NYSED certified teacher of Mathematics who also serves as the school's intake liaison. 6. The materials that will be used are The MindPlay Virtual Reading Coach, with 100 licenses and options to purchase more as needed, to be used three times a week for 40 minutes to build students English speaking, reading, and writing skills. All students will have access to the Internet in order to keep the focus on fostering a “culture of reading” to support language and literacy development. Teresa Day and Sarah Rodriguez will host two sections of the program in two different classrooms to support our ENL students. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. Rationale: Professional development activities in our school will contribute to our efforts to promote the academic achievement of English language learners ,by taking into account the educational, linguistic and cultural needs of our English language learner population. Professional development activities in our school will help us to better understand English language learners. We will meet regularly, twice a month in a variety of configurations to discuss how to better service English language learners. Our school staff will meet regularly in grade level teams, across grade level teams, or by content area teams to discuss the educational progress being made by our English language learners and to discuss student data and make recommendations on how to better educate our English language learners. 2. Teachers to receive training: Our school staff will also engage in meaningful professional development activities on an ongoing basis to discuss the progress being made by our English language learners and hold English language learners accountable for meeting rigorous academic expectations. Professional development for teachers is on-going and intensive. It involves both on-site and off-site 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development activities. One full time ENL teacher will work directly one on one with teachers to develop instructional strategies for ELLs. An additional ENL teacher will take on the same responsibility upon hiring. Additionally, the school is engaging in an instructional rounds model that allows for inter-visitation and feedback sessions among colleagues, by using the Japanese Lesson Study Model. Teachers also attend both workshops and conferences. 3. Schedule and duration: We are currently working with the FEI/ SIOP / Lesson study models and are continuing to train all teaching staff (both content and ENL/ESOL) in this model. Training is provided once a month for the months of: October, November, December, January, February, March, April, and May during Monday afternoon PD's. We are also benefiting from weekly literacy instruction hosted by our Literacy Coach from "Re-design", who provides in class coaching . Each training engagement and professional development module will have an agenda that will be distributed to every present and participating person. Parents, professionals, teachers, counselors, advisors, trainers, and supervisors who attend and participate in these training modules will print their names and provide their signatures on attendance sheet. Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained in the school hard copy by the the ENL/ESOL team. 4. Topics to be covered: All teachers are included in the professional development . Topics vary weekly but are part of a ongoing targeted program that includes: infusion of ENL/ESL strategies in to the classroom; scaffolding, differentiation, methods of engagement, rubric development, development of project based work, vocabulary development, and infusion of core standards into the classroom. The final component of professional development focuses on curriculum development and training in backward planning, implementation of the new core standards into existing and new curriculum maps, and incorporation of standards based instruction into the classroom. Teachers will receive per-session for both training and curriculum development. 5. Name of the provider : Professional development will be facilitated by our ENL/ESL Team , Andrew Yee, Sarah Rodriguez, Teresa Day, Joseph Ferrano and/or Cathy Swartz. The ENL department will provide training to the entire staff on the importance of maintaining students' native language and ways in which they can support students' bilingual development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. Rationale: Consolidated monies are used to support and promote parent and community engagement through a series of activities. About 70 parents are the intended target population. ELL parents may feel intimidated by or unprepared to help with homework or other schoolwork, especially if they have limited educational or English skills . We can help them understand their important role in supporting their child's success, however, with a few simple suggestions.Parents are offered workshops on computer instruction on a ongoing basis from October through May. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents can sign up for instruction based on their availability. Scheduling is flexible. These workshops are offered by the parent coordinator on site both during the day and after school. To date, workshops have been held on 9/ 1 /2018. Future workshops date include 10/ 6/2018 and 10/20/ 2018 and continue to be open and flexible thereafter. Community and parent engagement is also supported by the involvement of parents in the bi-annual multicultural celebrations as well as yearly opportunities to attend after school activities with their children. 2. The following topics will be covered during the school year.3. Parent engagement activities/topics will include :a) What is NYSESLAT?b) How can I help my child do better in school?c) Workshop -Culture day- Hobbies of parents of ELLs that speak about their culture.d) Workshop - College and Career Opportunities for my child . e) The parents of our ELLs will be invited into classroom during reading time. The parents will follow along with their children and learn about read-alouds and how to interact with text. This will help them work with their children at home to increase reading comprehension. 4. Name of provider: Andrew Yee, Sarah Rodriguez, Teresa Day, and Joseph Ferrano. 5. How parents will be notified of these activities: Parent notification occurs through a variety of venues including direct phone outreach, mailed and backpacked letters, newsletters and our phone messenger.There are a number of ways to notify and engage the parents of ELLs in activities that will impact higher achievement for their children, including:• Bilingual staff: When necessary, bilingual staff and /or the Parent Coordinator will contact parents- at no cost to Title III.Translated forms: Many of the forms are available in other languages from the state education sites, or through the Translation and Interpretation Unit .• School liaisons: Each family will be assigned a school contact who speaks their language and guides them through the process- either Maria Espillat, our community coordinator , Jose Alvarez, our parent coordinator or Anderson Almonte, our Dean and Melba Campbell - intake liaison. This will be in addition to all other school staff who speak Spanish.• Welcome kits: We will put together a "welcome kit" that includes key information, basic school supplies, parent brochures, and educational activities for our ELL families. It should be noted that the Title III money received covers only a small portion of the targeted activities and is supplemented with Title 1 -SWP and tax levy dollars. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name High School for Excellence and Innovatio Borough Manhattan School Number 423 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tyona Washington Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shakira Williams, Andrew Yee Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Rodriguez/Foreign Langua Teacher/Subject Area Melba Campbell/ Math/Intake Related-Service Provider Nancy Mercedes Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Claudette Robertson Coach N/A School Counselor Migelly Tavares Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Maria Espallat Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 186 Total number of ELLs 85 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.70% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 3 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? HSEI uses Achieve/ Empower3000 as a reading assessment tool , looking at data that provides information regarding pre- test, mid term and post-test and studying students' results to identify effective strategies for supporting developing readers not only in their stand alone classes but also in their content area classes. Additionally, our ELLs are assessed on an ongoing basis with the help of teacher's assessment and observation data that drives teaching goals and instruction. This provides us with a great amount of information about our ELLs who are making incremental gains by moving to the next level of proficiency or test out. . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 57  Ever since we have started to use NYSITELL as measurement for a assessing new entrant's English language skills, we have noticed that the proficiency level given by this state exam is more accurate than the LAB-R and it is more aligned to the NYSESLAT. We have also noticed, that the speaking part is more challenging for students as in the past most of our students would obtain a high score or even the maximum. We inferred it has to do with the more prevalent use of academic vocabulary. Thus, this year all ELLs in a stand-alone class will be given targeted vocabulary and reading intervention through the ILearn blended program created by Achieve/ Empower 3000. Our teachers Shakira Williams and Andrew Yee will be using the program with two of her stand -alone classes as it focuses on accelerating the literacy gains of students who need additional supports and services when dealing with nonfiction science and social studies content, as well as academic vocabulary. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? -State Assessments -End-of-unit or chapter tests -End-of-term or semester exams -Performance task -Research Papers -Lab Reports 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? . The students who took the regents exams (regardless of the content area) using a translated version or an interpreter did not necessarily obtain a passing score. The transitioning , expanding and commanding students scored better than their emerging and entering peers on the Regents exams, particularly the Math Regents and/or ELA (Common Core) Regents. b. In order to assist our students in both academic achievement and assessment, there is a variety of solutions that we are working with this year and they include the following: - Collaboration between content area and out ENL teacher to develop both content and language acquisition for ELLs. - Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sound educational decisions. - Implement a print rich environment, use of ENL dictionaries and glossaries in all subjects as needed, in addition to students being assisted by laptops with internet access in the majority of their classes. - Encourage teachers to participate in professional development opportunities focusing in instructional strategies go for ELLs according to the new amendments to C.R. Part 154. c. Our administration has taken some steps to better address the needs of our ELL population after analyzing the data from periodic assessments : - Agreed and supported our ENL teacher in acquiring and implementing the Achieve / Empower ILearn program and the Collaborative Strategic Reading framework. - Since data from the most recent NYSELAT showed that a big part of our entering and emerging students need additional supports with developing their writing skills , our principal ,Tyona Washington , organized strategic professional development targeting improving writing for ELLs by sending teachers from different departments to a workshop that implements the Hochman Writing Strategy. This strategy is being implemented across all content areas to increase their ability to write . Home language is used whenever possible to support the academic achievement of the students. Teachers frequently translate classwork especially for entering and emerging students who need it , in order to provide students with an easier access to content . Students at these levels are given the opportunity to answer questions first in their home language if this is more helpful for them 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL program HSEI implements is successful because of the strong collaboration between content area teachers and the ENL teacher. This can be measured by our students' NYSESLAT results, their progress from one proficiency level to another and across language modalities. Also, our data reveals that our ELLs are passing their content area classes and are meeting the credit accumulation requirements for promotion to the next grade level faster when these supports are in place . We have daily departmental meetings in addition to weekly grade level meetings where the ENL Coordinator /teacher meets with the rest of the staff and facilitates PDs where she makes sure content area teachers are fully equipped to support instruction in reading comprehension, writing, vocabulary, fluency, and foundational skills, by providing them with strategies that have proved to be successful. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As a school we look at regents and performance tasks scores to determine how to place our ELLs in the appropriate class base on their levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. HSEI implements a Freestanding ENL program where ELLs are grouped homogeneously. Entering and Emerging 9th ;10th and 11th graders have 2 periods of standalone ENL (110 min x 5 days/week = 550 min / a week ). The transitioning ELLs who last year were beginners/entering - are also placed with the entering and emerging group for one period a day , thus receiving 275 min. of stand alone ENL/week. The expanding and commanding ELLs are going to receive Integrated ENL in Social Studies ( grades 9,11 and 12 ) and ELA for grade 10 . The 10th grade ENL/ELA class meets 5 times a week = 275 min/week , period 2 . The 9th , 11th and 12th grade ENL/ Social Studies meets twice or three times a week , students thus receiving either 110 minutes or 165 minutes /week. Since we have been approved to implement the Achieve / Empower3000 through ILearn , we have decided that all ELLs ( entering, emerging and transitioning level ) will take this class five times a week, giving them more minutes of ENL per week which satisfy and even exceed all the mandated minutes for these ELLs regardless of their proficiency level. Our school is a trimester-based school, which means students may have different Integrated ENL classes according to credit accumulation needs and NYSESLAT proficiency level every trimester. Since our intake process is ongoing throughout the school year , changes to students' schedules will be done according to entitlement and enrollment date . b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in our ENL program as follows: entering will receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week; emerging will receive 360 minutes , transitioning and expanding will receive 180 minutes while commanding will receive their mandated 90 minutes per 2018-19 CEP 59  week. Entering and emerging students taking two periods a day for 5 times a week receive 550 minutes of ENL , which exceeds the mandated number of minutes. Our programmer , Sara Jackson, also makes sure the students are scheduled in accordance to their proficiency level and following the guidelines of the new amended C.R.Part 154 by completing the ELL Program students tracker in STARS. Changes to student programs are still undergoing to accommodate all commanding ELLs as well. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The primary goal of our ENL program is to assist students in achieving English language proficiency within three years. Our ENL program is run by our certified ENL teachers, Shakira Williams and Andrew Yee and its purpose is to amplify the literacy and academic skills of ELLs, to incorporate recognized and researched based ENL instructional strategies across content subject areas and to give students the skills to perform at city and state grade level in all subject areas. Teachers have been guided on how to differentiate content area instruction by providing visual aids, realia, math manipulative, using total physical response, flashcards and bilingual dictionaries. Vocabulary instruction plays a paramount role and it is provided to students when pre-reading is facilitated and as mentioned before. By using the Achieve / Empower ILearn blended learning program , we make sure that the instruction is designed to monitor those different levels of proficiency and automatically adapt to them when the system detects that each student is ready for greater text complexity. At the same time, as students move through their 5-Step Literacy Routine, the system is gathering performance data, which our teachers, can use to identify skill deficits and to target for small-group instruction. The gathered data is then shared with all the staff via Google docs and during professional development sessions. When possible ELLs are provided with books in their native language to facilitate understanding of the content area taught by the ENL teachers which periodically tries to translate the content ( by choosing strategic segments of the lesson to be translated) only for students who can mostly benefit from this accommodation, i.e. entering and emerging more than others. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? HSEI ELLs are informally evaluated in their home languages throughout the year as it is paramount to learn English. Also, during ENL classes, and not only, they utilize cognates, dictionaries and glossaries, a buddy system , and answers in their native language. The emerging and entering level students whose home language is Spanish as also enrolled to take Home Language Arts /Spanish classes as we saw this helps with developing their linguistic competence faster . We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language by using the data from the Spanish LAB-R. In addition, ELLs are provided with the opportunity to sit in class assessments as well as the NYS Regents examination in their native language. The rationale behind this approach is that we believe that proficiency in the native language supports efficiency in the second language acquisition process . 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We have the following strategies in place: intervention that serves as an extension of the regular school program, grade appropriate instructional support materials, differentiation of instruction in all areas. These students may not be able to read or write in their native language, and may also lack an understanding of the basic concepts, content knowledge, and critical thinking skills that their peers will have mastered. Therefore, we are using Colorin Colorado to attend to their literacy skills.Our administration is working hard to build supportive environments that respond to the immediate social, cultural, and linguistic needs of immigrant adolescents with limited schooling. For SIFE with special education needs, our Special Education teachers are integrating appropriate bilingual services and SIFE supports into special education programs and services; b. Plan for ELLs who have been in the US for less than 3 years (newcomers): We are trying to make sure our students have a supportive environment often created by one or more of the following: 2018-19 CEP 60  - bilingual/bicultural staff from the students' home country - a teaching staff highly trained in cross-cultural communication, the cultural and historical backgrounds of the students, and instructional methods that are designed to accelerate the academic achievement of our beginners. - student and parent access to support services (ideally in the family's native language) provided by counselors, tutors, mentors, and parent coordinators. - a buddy system with peers or classmates who can show students around and help them adjust to the daily schedule. c. Plan for Developing ELLs receiving 4-6 years: After school academic centers are targeting reading and writing, monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. d. Plan for ELLs receiving over 6 years of service(Long term ELLs): Our action plan for this group of ELLs who based on their NYSESLAT, ELA and Math test tend to struggle with reading and writing the most includes: using formative assessment to guide instruction, focusing on building students' oral and written academic language, encouraging primary language development. e. Plan for Commanding ELLs in year 1 or 2 of proficiency: The progress of students making the transition out of ESL classes is closely monitored. Additionally, commanding or former ELLs continue to receive testing modifications on Regents exams for two years after they achieve the proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. We have also invited our proficient ELLs to take part in the after school Title III program to attend classes as often as they can . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided with modified texts and assessments based on level and group activities, time extension, grade appropriate instructional support materials - Ipads, laptops and computers in order to provide access to films and documentaries, use color coding and highlighting, provide visuals for emphasizing important points etc. Additionally, there is a strong collaboration between the ENL teacher and IEP liaison, including the paraprofessionals , that shadow some ELL-SWDs' schedules . The learning disabilities that our ELLs face are learning differences that affect an individual's ability to process oral or written information. The most common type of learning disability our students have is a reading disability or inability to focus . Limited English proficiency can complicate identification and intervention for English language learners with learning disabilities. Thus, we are using the following : (1) a shared knowledge base among educators about effective ways to work with students learning English, (2) recognition of the importance of the students' native language, (3) collaborative school and community relationships, (4) academically rich programs that integrate basic skill instruction with the teaching of higher order skills in both the native language and in English, and (5) effective instruction assisted by technology in different content area classes, including ENL . 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We review IEPs regularly to ensure that students are programmed appropriately, and receive mandated modifications and support services as well as their mandated ESL classes. The Committee for Special Education also shares information regarding accommodations and modifications these students need , but the student's names are kept to initials basis due to secure information that has to be kept secret. The staff logs into SESIS and has access to a shared document that provides them with all the information they need when planning instruction for these ELLs-SWDs. . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of the interventions services in our school are offered in English with native language support when possible. ELA: In order to assist our students in both academic achievement and assessment, there is a variety of solutions that we are working with this year. They include the following: - Ensure adequate licensed personnel to deliver instruction as stipulated by NCLB and new ( amended ) CR Part 154. 2018-19 CEP 61  - Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to create a learning community which is knowledgeable and experienced in researched based Instructional Strategies - Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions. - Provide opportunities for students to be involved in purposely conversations - Incorporating all language modalities during the lesson, e.g. group discussions, journals in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards in addition to the Collaborative strategic reading , the Hochman writing method and RAFTS writing rubric ( which stands for Role, Audience , Format , Topic and Structure , when providing a written analysis ). - Ensure that teachers analyze students’ data to identify strength and weakness and utilize the findings to drive and differentiate instruction . - Encourage teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing in instructional strategies for ELLs - Implement a print rich environment, use of ESL dictionaries in the ELA classrooms. Math: In order to assist our students in both academic achievement and assessment, there is a variety of solutions that we are working with this year. They embrace the following: - Ensure adequate licensed personnel to deliver instruction as stipulated by NCLB and CR Part 154 - Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions. - Provide opportunities for students to negotiate with mathematics academic language, e.g. reading and solving word problems, interactive word wall - Incorporating writing as a component of the mathematics lesson, e.g. journals, Hochman writing method and RAFTS writing rubric, as well as the implementation R.A.C.E. strategy to ensure mastering of mathematical algorithms thru writing. - Provide opportunities to convey to others problem solving strategies and the justification of their answer - Ensure the identification and analysis of student strength and weakness to drive and differentiated instruction - Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to map out student specific needs. - Encourage Math teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing on ELL instructional needs. - Ensure that Math coach works closely with teachers to support in the implementation of strategies that will help the ELL community to close the learning gaps in mathematics areas, including Physical Education and Health are on board with using the Hochman Writing strategy . The strategy presented can be used in every content area and can provide a uniform strategy for the entire school to use. If implemented in every classroom every day either as a warm up, assessment, or part of independent practice, students would be writing an average of 21 sentences each day if they have 7 classes, which possibly could result in an increase in stamina, and studies have also shown that improvement in writing coincides with improvement in comprehension. The goal is to have every team practice using the activity presented in the Hochman training and then develop one students can use in their classroom the next day. Teachers also need to make sure to use the workshop model to introduce this strategy as it is to be used with the content, not separate from it. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As improvements are ongoing , aside from using Achieve 3000 and BrainPop ,our school is looking forward to implementing a phonics recognition/decoding program for our ELLs called Really Great Reading. Our students also need more writing and speaking so out focus this year is for them communicate more in the classroom with fun activities that they will enjoy and using writing to elaborate and express themselves in the classroom. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have a bilingual program at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 62  All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs which include Academic Centers , Men's Group and Dancing Classes that meet once or twice a week where students who struggle in classes (academically or behavior wise) are given extra support. These sessions often are used to focus on skills and competencies important on Regent exams. We also have strategic Regent Preparatory sessions ( FRESH Prep) during after school hours that have already started and will continue as we near Regent exams dates. Additionally, there are numerous extra-curricular activities available to all HSEI students, including ELLs. These seek to foster further inclusively into our school and include: competitive Athletics providing a range of team opportunities for young men/women softball/ basketball, football/baseball and soccer clubs; extra-curricular clubs/advanced academic courses; student council/government, College Trips, design club, EVC classes ; Parents are informed of these activities through phone calls and letters home sent in their native language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The programs that include technology and are used to support ELLs are ILearn blended learning for Empower /Achieve 300 , ,BrainPop. They are available to all our ELLs , not only to some subgroups. Additionally, for the low intermediate subgroup, our certified ENL teachers, uses a variety of instructional materials in order to better support our ELLs' needs. Thus, Milestones Introductory is used to teach newcomers and low-beginning students survival language as well as the beginning academic skills that they need to navigate through their school environment. . As students build these foundational skills, this program layers in activities that promote pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar, and comprehension development. We also use Azar grammar books to give extra support in grasping language. Our transitioning and expanding ELLs in our Integrated ENL program are exposed to teacher-made common core aligned unit plans which give ELL the extra support they need to obtain a passing grade on their regents exams since they have visual supports built in with access to National Geographic educational channel. ELL students are also provided visuals with the use presentations using the smartboard and projector, during certain points in the class they are able to use their smartphone or other device as an educational tool to assist with research, translation or answering a classroom poll or quiz. Word walls are employed to develop a robust vocabulary. Using student data, students are offered leveled text in the classroom from sites such as newsela.com. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program native language support is delivered through bilingual glossaries, classroom libraries, since native language support plays a paramount role . ELLs are given dictionaries and glossaries to use during their classes or at home as well as the option of writing their responses in their native language (as long as there is a native language teacher /co-teacher in the classroom). Moreover , for students whose level of English is very low, teachers simplify language without "dumbing it down." In communicating effectively with our ELL students, our teachers try to: - Avoid slang and idiomatic expressions. - Speak clearly and naturally, without going too quickly or slowly. - Encourage students to raise their hand if they don't understand a word HSEI has made a conscious effort to use ELLs' home language to support delivery and acquisition of content and skills. Thus, students are given ample opportunities to utilize dictionaries and glossaries, written and oral response in their home language, and translated versions of textbooks and/or class materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials we use are not only grade appropriate, but also aligned to the new common core Learning standards . Students are required to build on their language acquisition by creating word walls, using National Geographic as a tool for learning , alongside using the new I-learn program for which students can get access to courses not currently offered in our school such as Advanced Placement, world languages, and credit recovery. Through this program they can complete their coursework anywhere, anytime, from any computer with Internet access, helps students learn all the time—not just when they are at school. Also, when scaffolding language and using graphic organizers, our teachers are mindful of the differentiation strategies needed for each individual student. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 63  The three schools in our building share the gymnasium and students from each of the schools participate on the various athletic teams offered such as badminton, softball, baseball and basketball. Although the other players may not be designated as ELLs, they are bilingual and so are the coaches. Also, There are 2 gyms in the school, and we have our own gym to ensure all of our students have 5 days of PE. The gym in the second floor is shared. We share the 2nd floor gym, cafeteria, and auditorium. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year our parent and community Coordinator Maria Espaillat organizes summer orientations ,walk through, parent-student meetings, teacher -parent school dinners /lunches for all HSEI students, including ELLs/ELL-SWDs. There are also newcomer programs facilitated in the summer for two weeks and all newly enrolled students are welcomed to attend. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At our school currently there is one language electives which is Spanish. For our Spanish speaking ELLs this foreign language class is an opportunity to increase their literacy in Spanish which will aid in their English language acquisition. This school year we are offering AP Spanish and some are taking an English elective called “ Playwriting” 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL professional development takes place through a number of different methods. Our ENL Coordinator and ENL teachers, attends conferences and workshops offered through the Office of English Language Learners and then turns key and engages the rest of the staff in activities /strategies centered on academic success for ELLs. As a follow-up, these strategies will be implemented in every classroom , regardless of the content area. Also the Math department is actively engaged in professional development as well as curriculum writing for ELLs through the Office of English Language Learners . 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per the ELL Policy and Reference Guide , our non -ENL staff receives more than the minimum of 15% of PD time involving training in ENL techniques and methodology to help the ELLs reaching the same academic standards as the rest of the students. Our Coordinator Sarah Rodriguez and our ENL teachers Shakira Williams and Andrew Yee, will also be sent to PDs and workshop to total more than 50 % of total hours required for her as an ENL teacher. Staff also prepares for college trips ahead of time.This is an ongoing process,and our ENL teacher/coordinator has to turnkey information from the 2018-19 CEP 64  workshops she attends and engage the rest of the staff in using the same research based strategies that are proven to be successful for our student population. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? When a student is admitted to the NYC school system, parents are actively involved in the decision-making process. This multi-step process ensures the identification, the appropriate placement and educational services for every child in the New York City educational system. Parents are given a Home Language Questionnaire (HLQ) to identify the child’s native language. If the child is identified as an eligible candidate for Bilingual instructional services, an informal interview is given to the candidate by a pedagogue and the NYSITELL is given to identify the child as an English Language Learner or English Proficient. An entitlement letter is provided to parents to inform them about the child’s identification and the child is enrolled in the appropriate program within ten days. In order to enable parents to make sound educational decisions as to which program best meets the needs of their child, parents participate in several activities before they make a decision. Parents participate in an orientation that describes various programs for ELL and visit classrooms with the various programs. Parent brochures are disseminated in their native language to enrich the understanding each available program. HSEI is proud to offer Freestanding ENL to conform to the parental choice selections. Individual meeting with parents of ELls will take place starting this school year. Our ENL Coordinator individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. HSEI seeks to provide many opportunities for ELL families, just like all HSEI student families are expected to participate in their student's education. Thus, we will be: - holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference and Title III after school program conference. - hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; - encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; - supporting or hosting Family Day events; - establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents in addition to the GED classes we provide. - encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; - providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; - developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; - providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tyona Washington, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School For Excellence and School DBN: 06M423 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tyona Washington Title Principal Claudette Robertson Assistant Principal Maria Espaillat Parent Coordinator Shakira Williams, Andrew Yee. ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Melba Campbell Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Mercedes Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Migelly Tavarez School Counselor Paul Rotondo Alice Cohen N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/31/17 8/31/17 8/31/17 8/31/17 N/A 8/31/17 8/31/17 N/A N/A 8/31/17 8/31/17 8/31/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 69  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 70  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 71 
