2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M425 School Name: LEADERSHIP AND PUBLIC SERVICE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: PHILIP SANTOS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 02M425 212-346-0612 Fax: psantos@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: High School 310200011425 9 - 12 90 Trinity Place NY NY 10006 212-346-0007 Phone Number: Philip Santos School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Philip Santos Emily Stigers AshaRamlogan Emily Stigers Valerie Casey Angie Cordero Jane Acosta Megan Hickey Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue NY NY 10001 Room 711 Vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue NY NY 10001 8 th Floor ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Philip Santos Emily Stigers AshaRamlogan Angie Cordero Jane Acosta CouryVelez Jason Marti Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Ana Cartier Tammy JacksonTraore JackieBatailleKersaint Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our Mission Leadership and Public Service High School is devoted to the development of leaders who are conscientious, creative, and competitive global citizens. We teach our students to be fully engaged as active members of the school and local communities through various partnerships, training in Restorative Justice, participation in the arts, and rigorous academic expectations. Through the use of technology and proven traditional methods, we individualize the educational experience to meet each student’s unique interests, strengths and needs. Our staff is committed to maintaining a close-knit community where all students are cared for, challenged and fully prepared for life after graduation. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Non—Negotiable Principles 1. Distributive Leadership speaks to the fact that one person never has all of the answers. We are a community of 50 plus intelligent, caring and hardworking individuals with a wealth of experience and if we collaborate in a transparent and authentic way we can find the solution to almost any situation. Here are some of the ways that this is evident in our community: grade team facilitators, department chairs, various coordinator positions, the Equity Team, the Hiring Committee, etc. Two and a half years ago, there were three staff members who had a leadership role in the building—SPED Coordinator, Head Dean and UFT Chapter Chair. Today there are 19 teachers who have leadership roles. 2. Cognitive Engagement is essential to what “school” was created to be. Our classrooms, our after school programs, academic support structures, college courses, our partnerships, etc. must be aligned in order to continually challenge our students and prepare them to be successful. Here are some of the ways that this is evident in our community: our instructional focus, the work of the grade and department teams, our instructional alignment, SUMMA, Strive for College, our partnership with Touro College, the Business Plan competition, etc. We have made great strides in terms of this element but cognitive engagement will continue to be our highest priority. 3. Community Counseling speaks to the reality that school, and our role as educators, go well beyond transferring content and skills to our students. In some instances, we are father/mother figures, mentors, big brothers/sisters, counselors, etc. It takes a community to raise children well. This is evident in the role of the Principles of Leadership teachers/advocates, our guidance counselors, the enhancements to the Youth Development Office (Deans), Restorative Justice, the establishment of the Student Support Center, our mentoring programs, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  4. Experience deals with creating a high school experience that our students will cherish and will help mold them into well-rounded leaders, public servants and global citizens. We have made gains in this area. Some of the ways that this is evident is with SUMMA, our Arts program, our various business partnerships, sports teams, after school clubs, internship opportunities, our college office, the Liberty Partnership Program, etc. Our Core Values 1. Community 2. Leadership 3. Empathy 4. Accountability 5. Non-Violence Our Instructional Focus Our instructional focus is to align classroom practice around cognitively engaging tasks. Core Value Focus: Accountability We believe that students learn best by doing (ACE). • Academics (cognitively engaging tasks) • Connectedness (real world applications) • Environment (safe and supportive) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Needs: - African American male students with a focus on Mathematics - Latino male students with a focus on ELA 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made most of our gains in creating a supportive environment and in collaboration. Our focus this is deals with rigorous instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M425 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 523 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 47 5 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 45 19 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 79.3% % Reduced Lunch 5.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 59.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 64% 66.0% 3.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 57 55 1 82.3% 2.3% 18.5% 27.5% 7.5% 1.5% 4 15% 5.2 N/A N/A 69% 66% 73.2% 11% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In the 2016-2017 Quality Review the school scored a proficient and developing in the three categories of the “Instructional Core” (1.1, 1.2, & 2.2). Proficiency and developing is unacceptable. Our goal is to be well developed in these areas. Improvements to our “Instructional Core” will directly impact student success and credit accumulation. 2. Significant adjustments have been made in terms of collaboration, distributive leadership, & school environment but academic rigor is an area of concern. 3. One of our core values is accountability. The community has decided that accountability will be the focus for the school year. 4. The focus of our community is the overall improvement of our Black and Latino males. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students earning a minimum “10 credits” per year from 78% to 81%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We have aligned our instructional focus in order to address authentic literacy and the development of cognitively engaging tasks. We will increase after school, Saturday, & summer enrichment programs. All 12th grade students will be mandated to take a minimum of one college course. 9 – 11 grade students 9/18 – 8/19 Equity team All students 9/18 – 8/19 Grade and department teams 9/18 – 8/19 Guidance counselors 11th & 12th grade students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will be responsible to messaging our "Official" initiative. We will see a 10% increase in students who are official following the January Regents cycle. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Staff in order to facilitate the various activities. 2. Staff in order to monitor progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in credit accumulation in the 10th grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our Equity team engages in periodic benchmark evaluation sessions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Black and Latino persistently struggle. We currently have 177 Black and Latino males in our community. Historically, students do not feel connected to the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of Black and Latino males will acknowledge that there is at least one adult in the building that they have a connection with. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) In September 2018, all students were scheduled in advisory classes. This course is designed to provide support for all students. 9th grade students were divided by gender. All students Ongoing Grade teams In September 2018, the Student Support Center (4 social worker interns acquired from NYU & Hunter College) was continued. The purpose of the SSC is to provide extra assistance for our students. “At-Risk” students Ongoing Social Worker Throughout the 2018/2019 school year, staff members and students will be trained in restorative practices. 20 staff members 8/17 – 8/18 Equity team 4. September 2018 through June 2019, continuation of an online communication system between staff members. All staff Ongoing Full staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will communicate and monitor our expectations. There will be periodic check ins during the November, January, March and June meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. All staff 2. Strategic scheduling decisions 3. Advisory curriculum 4. Outside Restorative Practice trainers 5. Full time Social Worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a midyear student survey will be administered in order to gauge progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Equity team and our School Leadership Team periodically meet in order to assess our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In the 2016-2017 Quality Review the school scored a well-developed in three of the five categories that make up “Systems for Improvement”. One area were we scored a proficient directly relates to collaboration and CCLS (4.2). 2. For the past two years, grade and department team expectations and goals have been set by administration. 3. All protocols, although modified by teacher teams were also presented by administration. 4. Significant gains have been made in terms of common core alignment but the work is not complete. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22 By June 2019, teacher teams (grade and department) will revise all unit plans to ensure common core alignment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Team leaders and administration meet bi-weekly in order to discuss progress. All team leaders Ongoing Administration and team leaders Implementation of student work protocol. Implementation of online system in order to capture agendas and minutes All teams 1/19 – 6/19 Team leaders All teams 10/18 – 6/19 Team leaders Continued use of lesson plan and unit plan review protocols. All teams Ongoing Team leaders and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will communicate our goals for collaboration. Adjustments to unit plans will be submitted to direct supervisors on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. 10 teacher leaders 2. Per session in order to support the bi-weekly meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  In February 2019, the equity team will review all of the submitted documentation to ensure that progress has been made. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Equity team and our School Leadership Team periodically meet in order to assess our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 82% of 9th grade students earned enough credits to be on track for high school graduation. 2. 72% of 10th grade students earned enough credits to be on track for high school graduation. 3. 18% of students graduated college ready. 4. One of our non-negotiable principles is the concept of Distributive leadership. 5. Weekly Equity (mentoring) meetings take place with 10 aspiring school leaders. They make a direct impact on all school wide decisions but their official leadership roles are limited. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each member of the Equity team (currently 7 members) will have transitioned to a leadership position that includes instructional and administrative components. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly Leadership/Mentoring meetings 10 teachers 7/18 – 8/19 Principal, and assistant principals Individualized feedback sessions 10 7/18 – 8/19 Principal, and teachers assistant principals Targeted leadership opportunities 10 7/18 – 8/19 Principal, and teachers assistant principals Exposure to various aspects of the educational process 10 teachers 7/18 – 8/19 Principal, and assistant principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will communicate our expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for weekly meetings. Per diem in order to allow teachers to attend professional development opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly check ins, during our Monday meetings, will take place. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Equity team and our School Leadership Team periodically meet in order to assess our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. X 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Over the past three years, less than 15% of parents have been involved in school activities. Parent involvement directly impacts the achievement of students. Therefore, the SLT has agreed that an increased focus on parental involvement should be a goal for the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have tripled the amount of opportunities for parent involvement and see a 25% increase in parent participation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will begin to hold borough parent/teacher conferences. All families The school will offer targeted parent workshops. All families Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Association & Articulation team SLT Twice between 1/19 & 8/19 Six times between 11/18 & 6/19 We will increase the amount of event that parents can attend. All families Monthly between 1/19 & 6/19 Equity Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. None Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Acquiring a location for each event will be challenging. Selecting relevant topics can be a challenge. Organizing after school activities in order to attract parents can be a challenging. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After each major parent outreach event, the equity team and the SLT will review progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Equity team and our School Leadership Team periodically meet in order to assess our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Achieve 3000 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Credit accumulation, Regents & diagnostic exam passing rates, disciplinary data, & Leadership class advocate Credit accumulation, Regents & diagnostic exam passing rates, disciplinary data, & Leadership class advocate Credit accumulation, Regents & diagnostic exam passing rates, disciplinary data, & Leadership class advocate Credit accumulation, Regents & diagnostic exam passing rates, disciplinary data, & Leadership class advocate Small group and tutoring Publication project Elective support courses Scholars Program Blended Learning & Flipped Classroom Scholars Program Small group and tutoring Elective support courses Flex time Small group and tutoring Elective support courses Small group and tutoring Flex time During the school day, after school, during vacation/Regents week intensives and during the Saturday Academy During the school day, after school, during vacation/Regents week intensives and during the Saturday Academy During the school day, after school, during vacation/Regents week intensives and during the Saturday Academy During the school day, after school, during vacation/Regents week intensives and during the Saturday Academy During the school day, after school, during At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Credit accumulation, attendance concerns, disciplinary data, & Student Support Center Small group and tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Leadership class advocate Restorative Justice Peer mentor program Advocacy groups vacation/Regents week intensives and during the Saturday Academy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We are currently aware of 54 students who are STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide additional counseling (Full time Social Worker), all necessary school supplies, hygienic packages, and additional support to all students in temporary housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Title I 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title I 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Ongoing recruitment of potential staff members. A hiring committee consisting of 8 staff members was created in December 2012. Interviews for potential staff candidates for the 2015/2016 school year began in January 2015. Enhancing the interview process by mandating demo lesson with peer and student evaluation. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Require staff to attend ongoing network professional development. All staff members are required to conduct instructional rounds and intervisitations. All staff member participate in three professional teams. Increased mentorship program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. The development of an after school program that contains credit bearing courses, literacy intervention, tutoring, and SAT prep. A full time College adviser and the creation of the College Commons. We also purchased technology and educational software programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). The equity team and the SLT participate in the decision making process for all support. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All professional development is decided by the equity team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Additional academic staff Summer Bridge Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 332,431.00 16,979.00 X X 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 96,784.00 0 11,200.00 0 3,527,409.00 X X X PM School and Saturday Academy ELL population enrichment Enrichment programs, additional staff, and staff development 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Leadership adn Public Service High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Leadership & Public Service High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Leadership & Public Service High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Leadership and Public Service High Schoo Borough Manhattan School Number 425 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Philip Santos Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Carolina Ibanez/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Jason Marti/Special Education Related-Service Provider Superintendent Marisol Bradbury Assistant Principal Anthony Igbokwe Coach School Counselor Candance Thomas Parent Carmita Rodney Parent Coordinator Valerie Casey Field Support Center Staff Member Paula Waldron Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 666 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes a version of TCRWP with new additional lexile levels, as well as the WIST and TOSWRF for Just Words Intervention. Teacher-created assessments are also used to test fundamental academic literacy in ways commonly required in school courses. For example, our TCRWP assessments helped us determine that our ELL reading levels tended to concentrate in the P-R and W-Z ranges, with relatively few students inbetween. Using this data, we differentiated our reading instruction and the lexile levels of our readings in our to make content more accessible to developing readers while appropriately challenging for more practiced readers within these ranges. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We considered individual student achievement (course grades, NYSESLAT performance, Regents scores, other academic achievements) for determing the success of ELLs individually. In the aggregate, we look at NYSESLAT improvement relative to AMAO 1/2 AYP as well as Regents pass rates. ELLs also provide evaluations of instruction from their own perspective. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students tend to have either entered the system within the last 2-4 years as recent arrivals to the US/NYC, or have been designated for 6-7+ years and have largely grown up in NYC. Recent arrivals tend towards more intermediate proficiency levels, while many of the mid-long term students maintain at advanced but have so far been unable to test as Proficient. These data patterns reveal two distinct sets of students whose individual needs must be met. Both groups tend to score higher on speaking and listening than reading and writing, these latter categories are often what is holding back our longterm students from testing out. In the last NYSESLAT administration, most students who scored as Proficient came from the long-term NYC resident cohort. While some of these students had not had completed a full administration of the test in recent years and may have finally tested as proficient, marked increases among reading and writing subscores showed improvement in proficiency overall, despite some reported difficulties with the new test. There were not enough newly identified students to identify data patterns on the NYSITELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. To meet the amendments to CR Part 154.2, we have shifted to primarily offer an integrated ENL model for all students in heterogenous core classes. For expanding and commanding students, all services are provided under integrated ENL. For our entering, emerging, and transitioning studente, a combination of integrated ENL in heterogenous core classes along with a homogenous stand-alone class is provided. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL minutes are delivered through co-teaching by Mr. Oliver (ENL Teacher) and core subject teachers. Depending on student needs, either 90 minutes or 180 minutes of integrated ENL is provided. These Integrated ENL minutes satisfy the requirements for all expanding and proficient students. Emerging and transitioning students are also placed in a stand-alone ENL course, providing an additional 180 minutes of services and satisifying requirements. Entering students are provided 180 additional minutes of ntegrated ENL and/or stand-alone ENL, depending on circumstances. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our ENL class, content is delivered in English, with differentiated materials provided in home languges as support when beneficial. There has been a strong focus on understanding and analyzing grade-level news articles aligned with CCLS. The SOIP Model is used in order to ensure appropriate and sufficient scaffolding and differentiation. Scaffolds such as those developed by the Center for English Language Learners of American Institutes for Research (AIR) are provided to assist students, including graphic organizers, sentence frames, and targeted preteaching. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are assessed in Spanish relative to their proficiency. Our Mandarin speaking students have self evaluated home language responses. These home language assessments are generally integrated into a portion of a larger formal assessment. Our Bengali student is not literate in his home language and prefers to do work entirely in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We provide our SIFE subgroup with specific literacy interventions relative to need (e.g. Just Words for phonics development), as well as training in basic academic skills they may have missed. Newcomer students are also provided necessary interventions in addition to a high level of home language supports and scaffolds. For both the SIFE and newcomer subgroups, verbal responses are often used as a starting point for academic writing. As both of these subgroups start developing English language/academic skills and completing assessments, their instructional needs are reevaluated continually throughout the school year so interventions can be adjusted as necessary. Our developing and long term students are provided assistance in any specific modality which is relatively lower. Students with lower reading skills are providing specific reading supports and interventions such as the Content to Literacy Continuum, while students with writing difficulty are provided with one-on-one assistance and additional scaffolds. Former ELLs are provided with complex, college level texts and challenging tasks requring both English and home language proficiency. Due to CR Part 154.2, Paul Oliver (ENL Teacher) works with new Former ELLs and provides services for two additional years. All subgroups, including Former ELLs who have tested as commanding in the last two years, are provided testing accomodations including time extensions, separate locations, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, as well as alternative language tests, oral translations, and options to respond in the home language (except when prohibited, such as on English Regents exams). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used by teachers of ELL-SWDs include extensive modeling, use of visual aids, eliciting prior knowledge, cooperative learning strategies, and differentiated texts to maximize comprehensible input. Materials include graphic organizers, semantic/story maps, real objects, manipulatives, diagrams, videos, native language materials, jigsaw readings, scaffolded grade-level texts (such as a NY Times article with modifications). Technology used to assist ELLs includes projected visuals/videos as well as laptops for use with annotated reading and writing assignments. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs have been given as much time as possible in both the appropriate Special Education environments as well as the appropriate Integrated/Standalone ESL setting in order to work towards individualized goals in the least restrictive environment. In order to enable ELL-SWDs to meet their general academic and language acquistion goals, ELL-SWDs are given first preference for scheduling. This allows for modifications to curricular/instructional plans as needed to allow ELL-SWDs to receive appropriate services in the least restrictive environment that maximizes langauge acqusiition. Due to the nature of a high school schedule, our school has found that ensuring scheduling flexibility is the best way to achieve these dual goals simultaneously. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted reading intervention in ELA is primarily provided to entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs and/or ELLs demonstrating specific reading issues through the Response to Intervention (Secondary) methodology with appropriate modifications and supplemental native language materials and instruction. For students with fundamental phonic/phonological issues and/or lack of home language literacy, phonics interventions such as Just Words are provided. Targeted writing intervention is provided to entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs and/or ELLs demonstrating specific issues with writing and includes Language Experience Approaches, Literacy Design, and Intervention by Design, as well as supplemental native language materials and instruction. Targeted science intervention is provided to all ELLs demonstrating issues with science writing and academic language and includes culturally responsive teaching, guided inquiry, and sheltered English instruction as endorsed by the National Sciences Teachers of America as well as additional tutoring. Targeted math instruction is provided to ELLs demonstrating general issues with math or problem explanations and includes targeted vocabulary instruction, purposeful manipulative use, and supplemental native language materials and instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the gap between substantial increases on class/subject assessment scores and less significiant increases in Regent test scores, we reevaluated our intervention programs for both science and math. Reviews of student work and interviews of relevant students have indicated that interventions helped students gain the language and content skills to explain their reasoning, but were less helpful in developing the ability to comprehend and parse complex questions. In considering these results, these interventions have been modified to include more strategies for analyzing and understanding complex questions, integrating students' home languages to aid comprehension. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. This includes school clubs, including the Boxing Club, Cheerleading, Anime Club, Baseball Club, Syracuse University Mentor-Mentee Alliance, Theater Club, Computer Science Club, Video Games Club and the Community Service Club. Modifications have been implemented to maximize ELL inclusion (language subtitles for Anime Club films), language options for video games, translated instructional materials for computer science, and home 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  language support for instructions in Boxing Club and Cheerleading). Supplemental services offered at the school include Zurich Tutorz and Zurich Pro Skillz (in association with the Zurich Insurance Group) as well as Pace University Liberty Partnership Program and Peer Tutoring. ELLs are afforded equal access to supplemental services through the use of home language (bilingual tutors) as well as language materials (laptops with organized resources, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For ENL and ELA classes, our ELLs have been provided a dedicated laptop cart to enable their use of various electronic materials, such as Newsela.com, which provides lexile-differentiated articles with text-based scaffolded questions. This allows students to engage with similar content at very different reading levels appropriate to each subgroup. Newsela.com and similar sites also offer native language versions of English articles, which are often provided to entering and emerging students, and other students with relatively developed home language skills along with the English article in order to increase comprehensible input. In Social Studies, reading guides and home language support are used to modify and supplement mainstream textbooks such as World History (McDougal Littel), providing scaffolding and additional support to increase comprehension. In addition, in all classses, document cameras and projectors are frequently used to engage ELLs visually and provide more conceptually tangible. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Mr. Oliver (ENL Teacher) coordinates with Ms. Ibanez (Spanish/Foreign Language department) to develop home language support and appropriate assessments. We utilize resources such as Newsela.com, which provides Spanish translations of leveled news articles. Dual language news sites with both Mandarin and English translations are also used. When translations are not available from resources, Mr. Oliver and Ms. Ibanez collaborate to translate materials to Spanish and/or create bilingual vocabulary guides in Spanish and Mandarin. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Mr. Oliver (ENL Teacher) and Ms. Ibanez (Spanish Teacher) coordinate with Mr. Marti (Special Education Coordinator), Ms. Casey (Parent Coordinator), and other support staff to ensure services and resources are ensured for all ages and grade levels. Self-contained ENL classes are scheduled in two grade bands, 9-10 and 11-12, to help ensure age and grade level correspondence. Integrated ENL classes are co-planned to ensure that provided services match age and grade level. Mr. Oliver (ENL) works with teachers to ensure that ELLs are afford opportunities to work with grade-level texts while still receiving comphrensible input through appropriate scaffolding, support materials, and home language support. For ELL-SWDs, Mr. Marti and relevant guidance staff and teachers interview both parents and the student and consider age and grade appropriateness in the allocation of special services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? For ENL and ELA classes, our ELLs have been provided a dedicated laptop cart to enable their use of various electronic materials, such as Newsela.com, which provides lexile-differentiated articles with text-based scaffolded questions. This allows students to engage with similar content at very different reading levels appropriate to each subgroup. Newsela.com and similar sites also offer native language versions of English articles, which are often provided to entering and emerging students, and other students with relatively developed home language skills along with the English article in order to increase comprehensible input. In Social Studies, reading guides and home language support are used to modify and supplement mainstream textbooks such as World History (McDougal Littel), providing scaffolding and additional support to increase comprehension. In addition, in all classses, document cameras and projectors are frequently used to engage ELLs visually and provide more conceptually tangible. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ELLs participate in our Summer Bridge program along with all other incoming freshman, where the guidance team (led by Ms. Thomas) works with ELLs while Ms. Ibanez (Spanish Teacher) provides home language support. There they make contact with various counselors while Ms. Ibanez (Spanish Teacher) provides home language support. In the event of newly enrolled ELLs, a separate introductory orientation is organized. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language is offered for ELLs and all other students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As all teachers at our school are also teachers of ELLs, ELL-related professional development is provided to the entire staff. ELL issues and strategies are discussed regularly during Tuesday department meetings as well as a Thursday grade team meetings. This ensures that teachers and staff become familiar with similar best practices but can discuss issues and strategies in the context of a subject or grade level. ELL-related professional development is also provided to full staff during Friday faculty circles. Mr. Oliver (ENL Teacher) and other ELL staff have offered workshops during this time. In addition, Mr. Oliver also works with support staff to turnkey information such as changes to CR Part 154.2 and NYSESLAT modifications. In addition, Mr. Oliver has participated in over 60 hours of off-site ELL-related PD during the previous school year, coordinating with the rest of ELL Support staff to turnkey and/or distribute resources. Mr. Oliver participated in a 3 day off-site workshop related to supporting ELLs in CCLS and literacy. This series provided a series of incremental scaffolds to build authentic literacy and provide support ELLs need to develop analytical writing. This approach has allowed us to improve our scaffolding for literature instruction and ELA Regents preparation. Mr. Oliver then provided a turnkey of key strategies from the workshop during a weekly faculty circle. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Ms. Ramos (ENL Teacher) coordinates with counseling staff including Ms. Thomas (Guidance Counselor) and former middle school counselors in order to find out about students' abilities, interests, and needs. Ms. Casey (Parent Coordinator) and Mr. Oliver coordinate to maintain ongoing contact and communication with ELL students and families during the transition. We also examine academic assessment data from the Summer Bridge programs in collaboration with guidance counselors and ninth-grade teachers to determine if any modifications in ELL classification or course placement are needed. In addition, we proactively encourage and solicit parent participation in ELL parent activities (by making calls, sending translated materials home with students, etc.), and clearly and repeatedly communicate to all ELLs and their families that questions and concerns will be heard and addressed at any time throughout the school year. We reassure ELLs and their families that the school will continually monitor ELL performance to ensure appropriate access to support systems. Finally, we monitor school-wide ELL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  participation in co-curricular, extracurricular, athletic, and social activities, and actively encourage the ELL population to take full advantage of the opportunities and experiences offered by the school. Ms. Ramos (ENL Teacher), Ms. Ibanez (Spanish Teacher), and Mr. Igbokwe (AP Special Education) have coordinated to plan at least 15% of PD at grade, department, and staff meetings will be ELL-specific, with content varying as appropriate depending on grade/department/full staff. Our school plans to ensure at least 2 of our 12 monthly meetings are ELL-specific, first emphasizing full staff development and later focusing on grade level/departmental content. Mr. Oliver will attend a significant amount of off-site ELL-specific PDs in order to meet the 50% of total hours and to prepare turnkeys to assist with ELL-specific meetings for all teachers at our school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Ms. Casey (Parent Coordinator) is helping coordinate meetings between parents, Mr. Oliver, Ms. Ibanez, the student's guidance counselor, and any other relevant teachers. We will discuss program goals, language development progress, langauge proficiency assessment results, language development, and any other issues that parents or teachers find relevant. The school is planning to hold most of the individual meetings midyear, between the DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Ms. Ibanez will provide Spanish interpretation/translation while other language support will be provided through phone interpreters. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have annual indiviudal meetings as well as progress meetings arranged by Valerie Casey, suggested twice a year with more possible at the discretion of parents. ELL parents are also encouraged to attend PTA meetings and otherwise outreach events through outreach by Ms. Ramos (ENL Teacher), Ms. Ibanez (Spanish Teacher), and Ms. Casey (Parent Coordinator) depending on circumstance and language of preference. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Philip Santos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Leadership and Public Service School DBN: 02M425 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Philip Santos Title Principal Anthony Igbokwe Assistant Principal Valerie Casey Parent Coordinator Paul Oliver ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carmita Rodney Parent Carolina Ibanez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Candace Thomas School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M425 School Name: Leadership and Public Service HS Superintendent: M The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Melissa Ramos English Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When we adminster the HLIS, we pull information about parental home language and language preferences and confirm that information with students during the survey administration and subsequent initial orientation. As the majority of our ELLs are not new ELLs, we obtain the majority of our parent language preference through ATS biography reports and student blue cards. In addition, an additional survey is sent home for students to confirm this information, and contact information is confirmed during parent conferences Using this data, we create a report that is updated regularly with the languages that parents speak, by class and grade. To fill in any missing information, we also use blue card data, parent surveys, and teacher surveys (data collected in individual classes) . . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH FULANI HINDI 1 3 15 31 0 1 1 3 KHMER (AKA CAMBOGE) 4 MANDARIN NEPALI ENGLISH SPANISH URDU WOLOF 0 1 459 281 2 1 .12 .37 1.87 3.86 0 .12 .12 .37 .5 0 .12 57.16 34.99 .25 .12 1 3 15 24 6 1 1 3 4 1 1 456 284 2 1 .12 .37 1.87 2.99 .75 .12 .12 .37 .5 .12 .12 56.79 35.37 .25 .12 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families At the beginning of the year, we disseminate letters including a greeting from leadership, general school calendar, parent-teacher conference annoucements dates, after-school program information, proposed club offerings, and NYS Regents dates Additional information about conferences, after-school progam information and NYS testing are provided throughout the year. As these documents contain critical information, they are translated based on the preferences of our parents. July, September, October, November, December, February, March, April, May. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our first option is a faculty/staff member. Then we would look for templates, when available. When templates are not available, our translations are requested at least two weeks in advance to ensure parents' language needs are met. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school We have parent-teacher conferences on November 29 th 2018 and March 7 th 2019. We also anticipate informal interactions, such as attendance team/guidance/teacher calls to parents, after school parent meetings with admin or teachers as well as open school night. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our first option is a faculty/staff member. Then we would use DOE translation services. October, November, March, May, and various other months throughout the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. DOE translation line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our weekly PD times, as well as email, and announcements via Skedula. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A welcome poster is posted, and Parents' Bills of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access are provided during initial contacts at the beginning of the year. If contact with parents is not possible at the beginning, then these are provided at first contact or during the November conferences, whichever comes first. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback through a midyear and end of year parent survey, as well as through informal/anecdotal conversations with parents during conferences or other meetings. Surveys will be translated through use of the DOE's intranet page. Oral surveys will be translated using the language line. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62 
