2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M439 School Name: MANHATTAN VILLAGE ACADEMY Principal: HECTOR GEAGER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Manhattan Village Academy 02M439 310200011439 9 to 12 School Number (DBN): 43 West 22nd Street, New York, NY 10010 212-242-8752 212-242-8752 Ext. 2144 Phone Number: Fax: Ms. IrcaniaVega ivega6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Mr. Hector Geager Mr. Martin Kelley Mr. Randy Jaquez Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Randy Jaquez& Mr. Hector Geager SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mr. Fanny Matias Ms. KaitlynJacquez Ms. ErisedGutierrez Kimberly Cabrera District Information Geographical District: 02 Ms. VivenOrlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue 8 th Fl. New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: 212-242-7630 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ms. Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue 8 th Floor, New York, NY 100001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hector Geager Martin Kelley Randy Jaquez Ramon Nunez FrannyMatias KaitlynJacquez Franny Matias Yvonne Mariana Carin Diep-Dixon PerlaSanchez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hope Haskes James Malizio Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Manhattan Village Academy is to prepare students through the liberal arts and the development of Critical Thinking Skills to have access to the best colleges and universities in the country. We believe that a rigorous education based on the liberal arts and the Standards, Elements and Intellectual Traits of Critical Thinking provides our youngsters with the higher order thinking skills in the Humanities, Science, Mathematics, Language and the Arts. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Performance Based Assessment community serves a population of approximately 440 to 450 students predominantly Blacks and Latinos and City-Wide residents. The latest demographic data show that 60.0 percent of the students are female and 40.0 percent male. Also, 64.0 percent of the students are Hispanic, 14.0 percent Black or African American, 9.0 percent White and 8.0 percent Asian. Out the total student population, 2.0 percent are English Language Learners, 15.0 percent are students with disabilities and 63.0 percent are Economically Disadvantaged. The school building is a well-kept, modern building where pride in academic excellence and students’ achievement is evident in the prominently displayed student work and Portfolios. Manhattan Village Academy (MVA) was founded in September 1993 as part of a small schools project that consisted of six high schools working collaboratively with the Coalition Campus Project and the New York City Board of Education’s Office of the Superintendent for Alternative, Adult and Continuing Education Schools and Programs. Although our school is a former member of the Coalition of Essential Schools, we still subscribes to Coalition Principles. As such, we use in-depth, Performance Based Assessment (PBA) practices to teach our students the kind of Critical Thinking skills that they will need to be successful in college and all post-secondary paths which they may pursue. As a Performance Based Assessment high school our students are required to complete six major portfolios, in addition to passing 5 to 11 State-mandated Regents examinations with a minimum score of 65. They also have to take at minimum of 2 Advanced Placement Courses in their high school career at MVA. The central focus is to graduate our students with an Advanced Regents Diploma and with a deep understanding of the Critical Thinking System that we use. At Manhattan Village Academy we work very hard at teaching our students that they can succeed through hard work. In fact, as part of our English Curriculum, we introduced five years ago a success strand. September was declared “Success Month in our school. All the teachers set the stage for a successful school year by teaching a lesson on The 3Rs, Reason, Respect, and Responsibility, the first day of school. Then, the English teachers teach performance based assessment Success unit during the month of September, as part of the non-fiction requirements of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Among our most salient accomplishments this school year, we can mention the following: ● Graduation rate of 100% ● Attendance rate of 98.0% ● Honor Courses and Curriculum, as prerequisite for the Advanced Placement (AP) Program ● SAT Preparation Program ● College Now Program ● High academic expectations for all with a robust Curriculum based on Critical Thinking, Performance Based Assessment Portfolios, 11 Regents and 14 Advanced Placement Courses ● Caring, safe, supportive and nurturing school environment characterized by Respect, Reason and Responsibility ● High performing and accountable staff focused on students’ performance ● Academic enrichment ● College readiness ● PM School, Saturday Academy and Critical Thinking Summer Academy 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Strong parental involvement through consistent and frequent communication online, phone calls, newsletters, emails, Honor Celebration, Intercultural Dinner, Open School Night, 9th Graders Orientation, Open Houses, etc. ● Partnership with community-based organizations, such as the Jewish Board for Family Services, New York University, Baruch College, and The Hudson Guild, among others. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We also serve students with disabilities (15 percent) and Limited English Proficient Students (2.0 percent). A desegregation of the Regents Item Analysis and School Scholarship reports for January and June 2018; and Advanced Placement score reports for May 2018, shows that our Special Needs and ELL students are more likely to score low on the Regents and Advanced Placement tests. They also receive lower marks and/or fail courses. We are focusing our Strategic Instructional Plan for 2018-2019 on addressing the academic needs of these special student populations. In general, we are focusing on all students enrolled in Advanced Placement courses. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. ***REVISION*** Manhattan Village Academy continues to make the most progress in the element of Rigorous Instruction. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, a review of the data showed that we received a score of 4.81 (out of a maximum score of 4.99). This data also showed that when compared to the Borough and City averages for Rigorous Instruction, our scores were greater. We scored +1.27 points higher than the Borough's average and +1.30 points higher than the City's average. Another source of data to support our progress in the element of Rigorous Instruction was the 2017 School Performance Dashboard. The dashboard revealed a 99% 4-Year Graduation Rate, 99% College Readiness Index Score and a score of 99% for the % of Students with 90% or higher Attendance Rate. Additionally, the results in the aforementioned areas showed that Manhattan Village Academy surpassed the Comparison Group and Schools within the City Distribution. The multi-year data within the dashboard showed Credit Metrics, 100% of students earned 10+ credits in 1st Year; 97% of students earned 10+ credits in 2nd Year; and 97% of students earned 10+ credits in 3rd Year. These results show that most of the students at Manhattan Village Academy are successfully earning the required credits for graduation and meeting promotional standards. This school year, Manhattan Village Academy will continue to designate Rigorous Instruction as our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year. More specifically, we have decided to focus on strengthening our Advanced Placement program. All AP teachers will actively participate in targeted professional development respective to their AP courses. We will also plan to increase instructional rigor of the AP program by conducting an in-depth analysis and review of the curriculum in each AP course. This year will did not introduce any new AP courses, however, we are excited to enter our second year offering Human Geography to students in Grade 9, Music Theory to students in Grades 10 and Statistics to students in Grades 11 and 12. Our total number of AP courses offered this school year is 15. Our students and parents continue responding positively to this higher level of academic rigor. Almost half of all our students are taking Advanced Placement Courses. Students interest in honors courses continue to rise as they rigorously prepare students to take AP courses further along in their high school career. This year, as part of the complete re-structuring of the Advanced Placement Program, students can take any course that they want to take. As part of the Chancellor's initiative to have create more opportunities for students to be academically challenged, we are currently offering 15 Advanced Placement Courses. This year we will continue focusing on offering AP teachers further training on Advanced Placement. Also, new teachers will be hired with the condition to take the training to teach Advanced Placement Courses. The goal is to have all our teachers trained by the College Board to teach Advanced Placement Courses within their academic disciplines. We will continue paying for their training from the school's budget. 2018-19 CEP 11  Instruction in our school is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core State Standards through Curriculum Maps, Performance-Based Assessment and Understanding by Design Units. The teachers set high standards in their classrooms as evidenced by the academic rigor and the work that the students produce. Students are actively engaged in Performance Based Assessment Portfolios through which they demonstrate mastery in the application of 9 Intellectual Standards to 8 the Elements of Thought. The product of this instructional approach is a student who becomes a more disciplined and sophisticated thinker by demonstrating Intellectual Traits. Therefore, the student develops into an exceptional critical thinker. To continue our Critical Thinking work, every year, we will send four pedagogues to the International Summer Conference on Critical Thinking to get further training and expertise on the three strands of Critical Thinking. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M439 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 456 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 14 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 68.2% % Reduced Lunch 1.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 67.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 19.09 4% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 99% 96.6% 95.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 60 54 97.9% 9.2% 15.6% 13.6% 9.0% 1.3% 2 11% 3.9 N/A N/A 100% 100% 98.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. CURRICULUM : Manhattan Village Academy is “Well Developed” in this area (Quality Review Indicator 1.1 Curriculum). However, we feel there is still a large area for improvement and further academic rigor. Therefore, we are fully committed to continue implementing and solidifying the Advanced Placement program and to challenge our students academically at a higher level. Our goal is to increase the number of students scoring a 3 to 5 in the Advanced Placement exams by a minimum of 2% over the 2018 - 2019 school year. We feel that by increasing academic rigor we are meeting the New York City Instructional Expectations for schools to ground their work and goals around academic rigor and classroom practices. 2. Based on the NYC Department of Education's 2017 School Performance Dashboard, 99 met the 4-year College Readiness Index. This was 6 percentage points higher than last year. We must continue strengthening our curriculum to increase the percentage of students graduating ready for college and graduate school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By July 2019, students in 10 th , 11 th and 12 th Grades will demonstrate progress toward achieving college and career readiness as indicated by a 60 percent of them scoring between 2 and 5 on the Advanced Placement exams in World History, US History, European History, Macroeconomics, Biology, Environmental Science, Human Geography, English Literature, Statistics , English Language, Calculus, Psychology, Music, Computer Science and Spanish Language. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development Sessions for all AP Teachers: College Board AP Summer Institutes, Chancellor Day PD's, In-house PD's as well as District Level PD opportunities. Advanced Placement Teachers July 2018 to May 2019 Conduct Initial Planning Conferences (IPC) and Mid-Year Reviews with the teachers to assess the student progress toward mastering the content and skills to succeed in the AP course and exams. Past results, Instructional Planning and diagnostic and predictive calendaring will also be reviewed at these meetings. Advanced Placement Teachers September 2018 to May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Director of Guidance, AP Teachers Advanced Placement teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal, Director of Guidance and AP Teachers Introduce new curriculum, textbooks and course syllabi to AP teachers Summer Program, PM School and Saturday Academy to prepare the students for the Advanced Placement Exams at the end of May or first week in June 2018 Advanced Placement Teachers September 2018 to January 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Director of Guidance and Lead Teachers Advanced Placement Teachers and students September 2018 to May 2019 Advanced Placement teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal,Director if Guidance and AP Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to Advanced Placement Orientations, Pinning Ceremony, Portfolio Presentations, New Students Orientation, Parent-Teacher Conferences and keep them informed through letters and emails about their children progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Professional Development offered by the College Board 2018-19 CEP 15  2. Advanced Placement Teachers will collaboratively plan and support each other 3. School Principal, Assistant Principal and Director of Guidance will reach out to specialized High Schools to get curriculum maps and syllabus for AP program; and integrate the material to redesign our materials and resources in the AP program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. September 2018 – May 2019: Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers will meet biweekly during the Team Meetings to review and monitor student progress and performance. 2. July 2018 – June 2019: Workshops on Advanced Placement offered by the College Board and District 2 Superintendent's Office 3. September 2018 – June 2019: Advance Placement teachers will meet every other Tuesday during Other Professional Work to share student’s work and instructional practices 4. January 2019: Mid-Year Review using AARP Protocol 5. July 2018 - July 2019: Restructure the Advanced Placement curriculum completely 6. Have all new teachers complete a one week summer AP Institute 7. Program the students for the Advanced Placement Courses 8. Conduct Advance Placement Meetings for Parents and Students in June 2019 9. Organize Advanced Placement Induction Ceremony for parents and students in November 2018 10. Organize and Implement Guidance Support System for AP Students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Implementation of Advanced Placement Plan outlining activities/to monthly and the results from the Advanced Placement Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supported Environment Manhattan Village Academy continues to maintain a culture of high performance through hard work by adhering to our 3Rs; namely, Reason, Respect and Responsibility. The consistent implementation of the 3Rs sustains a caring and positive school environment, which contribute to the personal growth of students. Students are always placed at the center of everything we do by addressing their needs, wants and expectations, and they know it. The 2016-2017 Quality Reviewer rated MVA “well developed” in this area. For example: ● We have an open-door policy welcoming parents and students to reach out to administration or teachers as often as needed ● Teachers and staff are always available to help the students and meet their academic and socio-emotional needs ● Students express their opinions through their elected representatives in the Student Council, which meet every Friday with the Principal. They also express their views in the School Leadership Team through their two student representatives. ● Grade-Level Teacher Teams meet once a week with guidance counselors to collaborate in dealing with academic and behavioral concerns ● The Director of Guidance meets with the Principal at any time during the day to address student concerns and anything that affect our students’ academic and socio-emotional well-being ● Pupil Path/Skedula, the school’s on-line system we use to communicate with parents and record grade, homework, projects, assignments and general academic performance. All this information can be easily accessed by parents and students to monitor progress. It serves as an important means of communication ● MVA provide enriching after-school activities such as an extensive College Now Program, PM School, Saturday Academy, extra-curricular activities, involvement in athletic teams, and clubs suggested by students ● Last year the students started a Game Club and a Drama Club. Likewise, this year the students came with the idea to have a Robotic Club. These are in addition to a Boys Basketball Team and a Girls Basketball Team. There is also a Cheerleading Team, a Soccer Team, a Baseball Team a Girls' Softball Team and a Chess Club. There are also Dance Club, Arts Club, Newspaper Club, Band and Step Team. In March we celebrate MVA’s Spirit Week and in April/May we have the Inter-Cultural Dinner and Awards' Night to celebrate our diversity and honor the effort of our students. ● We maintain a highly respectful environment through the 3Rs and the 12 Non-Negotiable Rules 2018-19 CEP 17  ● There is a lot of communication among the members of the School Safety Team and everyone is on the same page when it comes to safety in the building Manhattan Village Academy has a well-established disciplinary policy and protocols that ensures a safe and supportive environment for students and teachers. The rules and clear as well as the consequences. Students and parents understand quite well that we do not tolerate violations and address any issue immediately. However, last years we notice and increase in student suspensions and one of our seniors committed suicide. Although the the suicide was unrelated to the school, this is an area of great concerns to us because we want to keep our students from harming themselves. We are working closely with parents and The Jewish Board for Family Services to address this issue. In addition, we hired a new Guidance Counselor to strengthen our Guidance component. One of our two Assistant Principals transferred to another school and we are looking forward to hire a replacement by January 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: To work closely with Parents, Students, Peer Health Exchange, Phoenix House and The Jewish Board for Family Services and provide preventive measures and intervention for substance abuse. Measurable: ● Continue offering Yoga as part of the Physical Education Curriculum ● Work with Peer Health Exchange to address suicide prevention in the health curriculum ● To provide workshops and intervention available for parents and students on Behavior modification and suicide prevention strategies ● Collaborate with the Jewish Board for Family Services to offer workshops and counseling to parents and students about suicide prevention ● Introduce workshops for students on stress-coping mechanisms and strategies ● Sharing and emphasizing with parents and students the DOE’s Citywide Behavioral Expectations Achievable: School Occurrence Reports; Collaborations with outside agencies; referrals; workshops; DOE’s Citywide Behavioral Expectations in September 2018 Relevant: School administrators, Assistant Principal Guidance and Safety Committee have already agreed upon this goal and are starting to create a timetable. Time-Bound: Monthly Safety Meetings 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Emphasize stress-relieving approaches as part of the Physical Education Curriculum by implementing a Yoga Unit as part of the Physical Education Curriculum Work with Peer Health Exchange to address suicide prevention Collaborate with the Jewish Board for Family Services to offer workshops and counseling to parents and students about suicide prevention and Behavior Modification Plan and deliver workshops for parents and students on suicide prevention and behavior modification during Parent Association meetings Decreasing the number of suspensions Sharing and emphasizing the DOE’s Citywide Behavioral Expectations with parents and students and conduct workshops on suspensions avoidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Physical Education Teachers, Assistant Principal Guidance and Principal AP Guidance, Counselors, Teachers, Principal, PHE and Jewish Board for Family Services Physical Education Teachers and Students Students and parents, Peer Health Exchange The Jewish Board for Family Services Students, parents and Assistant Principals Students and parents September 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals September 2018to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Guidance How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct parental workshops as part of the Parents Association Meetings, share effective parenting practices via newsletter, hold Orientations and organize workshops for parents during Parents Night in September 2018. We will have three College Orientation Nights, too. The following individuals and CBO will conduct workshops and orientations: The Guidance Counselor, The College Counselor, Guests Speakers from the Jewish Board for Family Services, Members of the Executive Board of the Parents Association, the principal and Assistant Principal. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Strengthen Collaborations and partnership with outside agencies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly Safety Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings and analysis of Occurrence Reports will show a decrease in the number of student suspensions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Number of suspensions for the school year will be lowered by a minimum of 2 percent from last school year 2. Yoga Units 3. Agendas for the Parent Association meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We will continue working on this goal in 2018-2019. Teachers at Manhattan Village Academy are organized vertically and horizontally into High Performing Teams, with a Lead Teacher in charge of each team. Vertically the teachers are organized into Grade Team, while horizontally they are structured by departments. The Grade Teams meet twice a week. The first meeting of the week the teachers discuss Student Attendance, Credit Recovery, The Lowest Performing 24 Students or L-24, Curriculum Go-Around, Homework and Academic Assignments, Upcoming Events, Student Behaviors and Communication with Parents. In the second Team Meeting of the Week, the teachers discuss instructional and learning issues, such as Student Work and Teacher’s Work. The Grade Team Meeting takes place twice a month during Professional Development. Teachers discuss in details items related to the Professional Development Plan. For instance, they fine-tune their Curriculum Maps, their Understanding by Designs (UbD) Units, Socratic Questioning and Seminars, Engagement, MOSL, Regents Item Analysis, Critical Thinking, etc. The teachers at Manhattan Village Academy are fully committed to their students success and improving their practices. However, they have to continue improving our performance with the Special Needs and ELA students. This past year, we experienced an increase in collaboration and planning among the special education and general education teachers. The special education teachers began planning formally with the general education teachers. In the ICT classes, the special education teachers, with the exception of one, who continued functioning as paraprofessionals assisting the students, collaborated more with the general education teachers. We have to continue increasing the planning and collaboration among these teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To establish formal collaboration between the general education and special education teachers by creating common planning time, as part of the weekly Team Meeting. The credit accumulation and Regents Passing Rate metrics for Special Needs students will be increased by 2 percent 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create Common Planning Time for Special Education and General Education teachers in at least two academic subjects. Teachers September 2018 Special Education, General Education Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal Special Education Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal Special Education Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Special Education Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal The Special Education Teachers will be focusing on differentiating the instructional tasks for the students. The Special Education Teachers will collaborate with the General Education Teachers in implementing differentiated strategies. The Special Education Teachers will introduce differentiate strategies and tasks and will Team-Teach with the General Education teachers in two academic subjects. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers and Special Needs students Special Education and General Education Teachers Teachers and Special Needs students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year 2018-2019, Parents will be invited to Teacher Led/Grade Team Case-Conferencing. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Special Education Team, Guidance Team and Teacher-Led Meetings with parents will show our service-oriented school culture and dedication to the success of our students and parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Special Education Teachers, Lead Teachers, Circular 6, Preparation Period, Other Professional Work, Professional Development Monday Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After-Action Review Protocol Mid-Year Review in January and June 2019 and June Regents and Scholarship Report will show a 2 percent gain. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number of Special Needs students passing their classes will increase. Specifically, we noticed that the Special Needs students are more likely to fail 10th Grade ELA and Living Environment classes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework for Great Schools Report for 2017 reflects a 76 percent satisfaction on the Quality of Professional Development offered by the Professional Development Team. This is surprising since the teachers decide, choose and produce the Professional Development Plan. This year we will have the teachers produce a personalized Professional Development Plan and we will provide the resources and time for them to implement it. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To continue working and collaborating with the UFT Chapter Leader and teachers in meeting the needs, wants and aspirations of the teachers. We expect to see a 2 percent gain over the school year 2018-2019 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each Academic Department will meet and produce and implement a Professional Development Plan for the Department Teachers Each teacher will produce and implement a personalized Professional Development Plan Teachers Provide resources to teachers and Departments to develop and implement Professional Development Plans Teachers Facilitate Professional Development activities and workshops, such as Socratic Seminars, through the Foundation for Critical Thinking by Lead Teachers, The Department of Education, etc Academic Departments Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Team Leader, Lead PD Teacher, teachers and Members of the Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Team Leader, Lead PD Teacher, teachers and Members of the Professional Development Team September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Lead Professional Development Teacher, Members of the Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged in developing strategies to work with their children through the School Leadership Team and during the monthly Parents Association Meeting, College Orientation Nights and New Students' Orientation by 2018-19 CEP 25  planning and conducting workshops lead by parents, College Counselors, the Principal and guest speakers. The workshops will take place from September to June. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Lead Teachers, Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal, Professional Development Plans, Counselors, Guest Speakers and Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Professional Development Goal Setting; Mid-Year After Action Protocol Review; Implementation of Professional Development Plans. These will take place from September 2018 to June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Survey; After Action Review; Teacher Feedback; PD Agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the data shows that parents appreciate the close contact they have with the school, teachers, office staff and administration as evidenced in the Framework for Great Schools Report (2016) indicating Strong Family-Community Ties, exceeding target, by earning a score of 4.35. The monthly newsletter High School Years and PupilPath keeps us in touch with parents on a regular basis. Likewise, during Parent Engagement Time on Tuesday, teachers email parents regarding their children’s academic progress. We also invite parents to the Grade Team Meetings to discuss concerns about their children’s performance and how we can help. The Grade Teams email parents a weekly update on the upcoming events for the grades. Most parents attend the evaluation conferences/parent-teacher conferences four times a year. To continue improving building strong relationships with parents and students, we will introduce Pupil Path and Skedula this upcoming school year. TeacherEase has many limitations, among them, it is not integrated with ATS, SEISS, or any other Department of Education system. TeacherEase also does not provide access to its website on mobile devices which limits access to contemporary students. PupilPath/Skedula offers live monitoring of student attendance to school and to classes. Parents will also receive a copy of student attendance reports in live time as well as notification of grade submission. Student transcript and schedules will also be available, live, these tools were not previously available. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase parental and student involvement and sharing of student attendance, performance, and academic needs. We will continue to maintain a 98 percent attendance rate. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To receive Professional Development on implementation and usage of program from PupilPath/Skedula. Principals, Assistant Principals,Teachers, Parents, Students September 2018 to June 2019 Data review by Grade Teams, specifically to analyze attendance, up-to-date classroom progress, and grades and status of assignments To help students meet students academic needs teachers will regularly review and coordinate with Special Education department to ensure IEP's are updated. Grade Team Leader will continue to communicate to communicate with parents regularly about grades, credit accumulation, and academic status updates Assistant Principal, Leader Teachers, Teachers, Administration Special Education Lead Teacher, Teachers, Administration Parents, Grade Team Leader, Teachers, Administration September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, teachers, Skedula Training Staff, SLT Members Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Office Staff and teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Office Staff and teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. OTPS, Teachers, Leader Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principals, Monday-Professional Development, Tuesday-Parent Engagement Time and other Professional Work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 28  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Review in January 2019 and June 2019 of Parents Agendas and Attendance; Teachers’ emails to parents; Agendas of Events; Professional Development Agenda and Timetable. This will show an 5 percent increase in parental participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess progress; teacher communication with parents using Skedula and parent access though PupilPath. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Extra Help ● Portfolio Revisions ● Credit Recovery ● Test corrections ● Enrichment Courses ● SAT Prep ● Math Literacy ● English Literacy ● Castle Learning ● Kahn Academy ● regentsprep.org ● Extra Help ● Portfolio Revisions Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Small Group Instruction (no more than 10 students per teacher) ● One-to-One Tutoring ● Detention ● Lunch with the Principal ● Lunch with the Assistant Principals ● Detention Coordinator ● Small Group Instruction (no more than 10 students per teacher) ● Credit Recovery ● Delta Math ● One-to-One Tutoring ● Test corrections ● Detention Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Marking Period Grades – January & June; Regents Examination Scores June 2018, August 2018 and January 2019; Teacher’s Recommendation; 8 th Grade Performance; Predictive and Diagnostic Regents Exams; Periodic Assessments; Regents Item Analysis; PSAT and SAT Results Marking Period Grades – January & June; Regents Examination Scores June 2018, August 2018 and January 2019; Teacher’s Recommendation; 8 th Grade Performance; Predictive and Diagnostic Regents When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● During the school day ● Before and After School ● Saturdays ● During the school day ● Before and After School ● Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 30  Science Social Studies ● Enrichment Courses ● Lunch with the Principal ● SAT Prep ● Math Literacy ● English Literacy ● Castle Learning ● Kahn Academy ● regentsprep.org ● Extra Help ● Portfolio Revisions ● Lunch with the Assistant Principals ● Detention Coordinator ● Small Group Instruction (no more than 10 students per teacher) ● Credit Recovery ● Delta Math ● One-to-One Tutoring ● Test corrections ● Detention ● Enrichment Courses ● SAT Prep ● Math Literacy ● English Literacy ● Castle Learning Kahn Academy ● regentsprep.org ● Extra Help ● Portfolio Revisions ● Lunch with the Principal ● Lunch with the Assistant Principals ● Detention Coordinator ● Small Group Instruction (no more than 10 students per teacher) ● Credit Recovery ● Delta Math ● One-to-One Tutoring ● Test corrections ● Detention Exams; Periodic Assessments; Regents Item Analysis; PSAT and SAT Results Marking Period Grades – January & June; Regents Examination Scores June 2018, August 2018 and January 2019; Teacher’s Recommendation; 8 th Grade Performance; Predictive and Diagnostic Regents Exams; Periodic Assessments; Regents Item Analysis; PSAT and SAT Results Marking Period Grades – January & June; Regents Examination Scores June 2018 August 2018 and January 2019; Teacher’s Recommendation; 8 th Grade Performance; Predictive and Diagnostic Regents ● During the school day ● Before and After School ● Saturdays ● During the school day ● Before and After School ● Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 31  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Exams; Periodic Assessments; Regents Item Analysis; PSAT and SAT Results Counseling for students and their families; At-Risk Intervention Plan; Wake-Up Calls; Lateness and Absence Calls and emails; Guidance Conferences with Principal, Assistant Principal and/or teachers; Grade Team Conferencing ● Enrichment Courses ● Lunch with the Principal ● SAT Prep ● Math Literacy ● English Literacy ● Castle Learning ● Kahn Academy ● regentsprep.org ● Individual Counseling ● Lunch with the Assistant Principals ● Detention Coordinator ● Individual Counseling ● During the school day ● Group Counseling ● Group Counseling ● Outside Counseling ● Outside Counseling ● Guidance Conferences ● Grade Team Case Conferencing ● Before and After School ● Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Financial assistance to purchase uniform and participate in extra-curricular activities, assign teacher to work one-on-one with student, collaborate with case workers, to coordinate financial and emotional support, counseling, and monitoring students physical and emotional health. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will conduct Professional Development four times a month. The Professional Development will be planned and conducted by the Lead Teachers and the Subject Lead Teachers, as well as other faculty members. The first priority of this year Professional Development will be on the Danielson’s Framework. The second priority for our Professional Development will be the Common Core State Standards. As part of the Danielson’s Framework, we will continue norming the rubrics with the staff. We will be attending Professional Development on the Danielson’s Framework-- and practicing with video clips of teaching-- throughout the year offered by the DOE. The Professional Development Lead Teacher and the science, math and ELA Subject Team Leaders will continue working on aligning our curriculum maps with the Common Core State Standards and designing Understanding by Design Units based on the CCSS. Likewise, our science teachers will participate actively in STEM Professional Development. We will continue our Teacher and school inter-visitations to learn and implement effective and engaging practices in the different subject areas. Our teachers will also attend Professional Development workshops and conferences offered by the New York City Department of Education and other educational institutions and associations, such as Math for America. Three teachers will be attending the training and conference on Critical Thinking in California. Then, upon their return, they will share with the faculty during Professional Development time on Mondays. Each new teacher in our school will be assigned a highly-qualified and highly effective mentor from our staff. In addition, the Subject Team Lead Teacher will be working with the new teachers and with teachers in need of improving targeted areas, as per the Danielson’s Framework. Each teacher will receive Professional Development on planning lessons to integrate Critical Thinking. Offer differentiated opportunities for professional growth such as Advanced Placement seminars, CTE workshops, Common Core workshops, Castle Learning and Khan Academy training. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 35  ● Professional Development during Faculty Meeting on the development of Activities showing the application of the Intellectual Standards of Critical Thinking to the Elements of Thinking ● Training on Critical Thinking conducted by the Foundation for Critical Thinking ● We will attend Professional Development workshops on Engineering Design, Arts in ELA, Mentoring, Special Education and Academic Disciplines offered by outside vendors and the New York City Department of Education ● We will invite academic experts to conduct workshops with the faculty ● Professional Development will be offered to At-Risk students and strategies to make them succeed ● Principal and Assistant Principals will attend Professional Development on Critical Thinking and Danielson’s Framework ● Professional Development focused on differentiation strategies and engagement as part of our Strategic Instructional Action Plan ● Teachers will perform inter-visitations and share best practices to improve instruction Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teacher decides and schedule Diagnostic and Predictive Assessments. They also use Performance Based Assessment and Projects to evaluate student’s understanding in a deeper way. Teachers select the appropriate assessment tools and the Professional Development that they need to assess their students. Members of each discipline must conduct Professional Development for their Subject Team, during the Subject Department Team meeting twice a month. This year we will be continuing to develop our skills with Castle Learning and the Kahn Academy online assessment and tutoring tools. During the winter and spring of 2018, teachers worked in departments with the Subject Team Leader during Professional Development Monday sessions to create assessments and student rubrics aligned to the CCLS to improve instruction. The Grade Team Leader also led their teams into looking at student work to improve learning and instruction. Teachers in our school are experts at using protocols for improving instruction by discussing students’ and teachers’ work. Teachers gave feedback to the UFT Chapter Committee who collaborated with the Principal on an SBO schedule for the school ensuring that there was time during the school day for teachers to work together to look at student work and improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 233,630.00 0 0 0 2,528,095.00 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 37 Column B Section Reference(s) As per Action Plans  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 38   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan Village Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of OSFEP, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students . Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by doing the following: • providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., common core information, literacy programs for their children, math intervention and portfolios and use of technology for academic success; • providing parents with the information and training needed to become effectively involved in planning and decision-making in support of the education and academic success of their children—specifically, parent Conferences, College 2018-19 CEP 40  Planning Seminars, Financial Aide Seminars and the availability of a college coordinator who will meet with them as needed. • fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; In this, the school will use PupilPath program for [parents to monitor daily and weekly the progress of their child, in addition, parents are given access to Skedula and other written and online information to keep them informed and help their child to succeed. • providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; this is accomplished in many ways at Manhattan Village—in general by being available at any time to meet with and answer parent questions; specifically, the administrative staff works to help complete forms for the Lunch application which helps their child to succeed; the Guidance Department contacts parents frequently for at-risk conferences; parents of students whose attendance is poor or lacking are called in for conferences and guidance is give regarding state and DOE mandates for graduation; Guidance intervene to provide parents with information for free health care and opens the way for students to receive counseling services inside and outside of the school; administrative staff routinely assist parents by providing information/assistance and as well as required forms to prove attendance/enrollment of their child and to meet Social Security and New York City requirements to meet requirements to receive public assistance. • sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; parents are invited routinely for parent-teacher conference; 9 th Grade parents are invited to several orientation conferences to explain how we will support them and their child as they go through the four years Manhattan Village Academy including course work, Regents Examinations and Portfolios required as well as our specific graduation requirements. In addition, parents are invited to the Parents Association Meeting monthly, the Awards Dinner, and are invited to participate in the School Leadership Meetings (monthly). • providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; parents are invited to help support the school by participating in giving vocational or other conferences to students and are called upon occasionally to attend trips or other events related to student success. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents especially during the School Leadership Meetings and the Parents Association meetings, to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms—especially the School Survey-- will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality The PIP for Manhattan Village Academy describes how our school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (below) is a component of the PIP that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, the Parent Coordinator and members of the school’s Parent Association (PA), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, 2018-19 CEP 41  were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: • actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program (and all of its programs) as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; • help to engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills as needed or required; • ensure that Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; • support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development to support them in helping their children to achieve their goals and success, especially in developing critical thinking and leadership skills; • maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator and the school staff will provide parent assistance and workshops/conferences based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file reports and accountability reports as required; • will conduct parent workshops/conferences/meetings with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level core curriculum and the schools assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build our parents’ capacity to help their children to be successful in their lives at home/community and in a college environment; • provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., OSFEP/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; • host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year (for the entire parent community) to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under OSFEP; • schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to meet with teachers, staff and/or administrators to work to assist in helping their child maximize success and will be allowed to provide insights and suggestions as to how best to help their child succeed; • translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 CEP 42  • will organize as often as required a Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address student academic progress and requirements as well as individualized needs and allow parents to express and explain the ways their children can best be helped.; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: • holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum/Expectations Conference with the newer parents—especially the 9 th Grade Parents; • hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year e.g. Informational Evenings, Concerts, Award Ceremonies etc. • encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; • work at establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents as necessary; • hosting events to support and celebrate their role in asserting leadership in education for their children: parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents all welcome; • encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; • providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress and to provide explanation of their children’s progress and what obstacle may be inhibiting their child’s success; • developing and distributing a school information or web publication (on the school website) designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; • providing school letters/information for regular written communication between teachers and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable, in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Manhattan Village Academy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of OSFEP, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: • using academic learning time efficiently; • respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; • implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards; • offering high quality instruction in all content areas; • providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by OSFEP; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships • conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; • convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting (to which all parents are invited by the PA) prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; • arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting as required or necessary; • respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; • providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; • involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; • providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; • ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff • ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; • notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; • arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 44  • planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents • creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; • assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); • sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; • supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; • ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; • advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with OSFEP Title I requirement for OSFEP and Title I programs; • monitor my child’s attendance (above 90%) and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities • ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; • check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; • read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); • set limits to the amount of time my child surfs the Internet, watches television or plays video games; • promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, the School Band, team sports and/or quality family time; • encourage my child to follow school’s 12 Non Negotiable Rules and the NYC Discipline Code rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; • volunteer in my child’s school or assist when possible from my home as time permits; • participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; • communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; • respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 45  • become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; • participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; • take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; • share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; • attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities • complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; • follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, teachers and staff, my community and others’ property; • practice REASON-RESPECT-RESPONSIBILITY (3Rs) in all of my interactions with others • always resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; • always try my best to learn through hard work and perseverance . 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Manhattan Village Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 439 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Hector Geager Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Esther Cho Teacher/Subject Area - Teacher/Subject Area - Related-Service Provider - Superintendent - Assistant Principal Rickey Brown Coach - School Counselor - Parent Randy Jaquez Parent Coordinator Ircania Vega Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 434 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 2 0 8 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.84% 2018-19 CEP 47  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis - - - - - - 0 4 - - - - - - 0 3 - - - - - - 0 2 - - - - - - 0 5 - - - - - - 0 6 - - - - - - 0 7 - - - - - - 0 8 - - - - - - 0 9 - - - - - - 0 10 11 12 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Of our population of 8 ELLs, all 8 are Expanding (Advanced). Thus, there is no current assessment tool needed to assess early literacy skills. The NYSITELL, which is adminstered to eligible students upon entry to the DOE, as well as the annual NYSESLAT that is administered to current ELLs, assess the literacy skills of our ELLs, and are considered when preparing students for the Regents. To measure students' progress, teachers use ongoing formative and curriculum-embedded teacher-created assessments, diagnostic assessments, and predictive assessments based on actual Regents material, which is grounded in reading and writing. In addition, ELLs take in-house periodic acuity assessments to gauge development of the modalities, such as reading comprehension and writing skills. One test we use for this is the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test. The data reveals that the majority of our ELLs are advanced in listening and speaking, but struggle with reading comprehension; this informs our school's instructional plan in that teachers adjust their curriculum accordingly and are mindful to challenge our ELLs to increase their academic language and vocabulary as well as work on higher-order inference questions. 2018-19 CEP 48  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that we have in place to support this effort are weekly staff Professional Development sessions that involve relevant topics, such as how to effectively utilize and then analyze various types of formative and summative assessments in our classrooms. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need are the NYC performance tasks in the core classes, the ELA Periodic Assessment scores, NYSESLAT scores, Regents scores, and report card grades in individual subject areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, teachers meet in grade teams twice a week to analyze the data by doing an item analysis of the questions. Next, each grade team decides the details of the intervention plan, which involves assigning students to PM school, Saturday Academy, and Regents Prep programs that address their individual needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A - we are a high school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments data used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs involve accessing the test history screen on ATS, as well as the RESI screen. Regents scores in each core content area are analyzed to inform each student's programming needs. Additionally, we take into consideration the NYSESLATs test scores each year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once the NYSESLAT report is released each August, the ELL teacher accesses ATS to retrieve the scores, as well as each ELL's Regents scores. After printing the scores, she then conferences with the Administration, so that any recommendations and adjustments that would need to be made to students' programming could be completed before the school year begins in September. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2, "Entering" English Proficiency level students receive a total of 540 minutes per week: 180 minutes of Standalone ENL instruction and 360 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. "Emerging" English Proficiency level students receive a total of 360 minutes per week: 90 minutes of Standalone ENL instruction and 270 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. "Transitioning" English Proficiency level students receive a total of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week. "Expanding" English Proficiency level students receive a total of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week. "Commanding" English Proficiency level students receive a total of 90 minutes of 2018-19 CEP 49  Integrated ENL instruction per week. Where there is flexibility between Standalone and Integrated Instruction (for "Emerging," "Transitioning," and "Commanding"), Integrated Instruction is the option taken each time. With regard to the Integrated ENL instruction, the ELL teacher co-teaches with the core content area teachers and pushes into their classrooms. Thus, current and former ELLs are grouped together according to grade (with mixed proficiency levels) and travel together as a group for these subjects. The standalone ENL classes are separated by proficiency level and are ungraded, although there cannot be more than two contiguous grades in each class. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Please refer to Question #1A above for the breakdown of minutes. Our school ensures that the mandated number of minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model through confirmation from our ELL Coordinator, who attends Professional Development sessions with the ELL Compliance Specialist on topics such as the "Nuts and Bolts" of ELL Coordination as well as the ELL Policy and Reference Guide (EPRG). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ELLs, regardless of their lengths of service and proficiency levels, are actively engaged in a standards-based academic curriculum at MVA that integrates the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers maintain student portfolios, which allow for careful, concrete tracking of a student’s progress over the course of a school year. MVA emphasizes student production that is task-oriented and project-oriented. While various ELL approaches (such as scaffolding, use of visuals, differentiated instruction) have found their way into the mainstream classrooms at MVA to aid students in the demands of the CCLS, there is a general instructional emphasis on the Communicative method within the freestanding ELL classes. At MVA, materials and media play an important role in having students actively involved in the learning process, and many of the materials found in the classrooms are task-based and encourage Communicative language use. All content areas integrate the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) while engaging students with contextualized input that encourages critical thinking that serves a purpose in the real world. To scaffold difficult literature, materials such as adapted, leveled texts are used: Oxford Bookworms and Shakespeare Made Easy. Native language support is provided through the NYSed bilingual glossaries, which the students refer to. Resources are available, such as Spanish texts and textbooks in Spanish, as well as dictionaries. Portfolios are performance-based assessment units, and are used to make content comprehensible and foster language development by engaging students in meaningful projects allowing them to interact with language. Additionally, although our program emphasizes English language immersion, there is native language support for the content areas when it comes up in context; cognates are used by our diverse staff, who speak a range of languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As mentioned earlier, the our ELLs travel together by grade and are grouped heterogeneously with regard to proficiency levels and years of service. In core content classes such as Global Studies, learning is differentiated according to subject and grade, 2018-19 CEP 50  and ability level (ICT classes). In their classes, differentiated instruction is also given to the various ELL subgroups through learning stations. On most days, students will work on different tasks according to their level, or have the same task, but adjusted to their level. For example, if the activity is to write about their immigration experience, the SIFE and Newcomer groups would get scaffolded graphic organizers and templates, while the Developing would get sentence starters, and the Long-Term and Former ELLs would get outlines. There are also activities where levels are heterogeneous and students work together on a group project, but are grouped strategically; for example, a Long Term ELL who speaks Spanish will be in the same group as a Newcomer ELL who also speaks Spanish. Former ELLs receive two years of services after they pass the NYSESLAT, 90 minutes per week. Like the current ELLs, for two years they continue to receive time and a half for NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents exams in a separate location, are provided NYSed bilingual glossaries, and may take Regents exams in alternate language editions. Differentiation also happens by level and need. For example, teachers differentiate the task, assignment, and assessment, and individualize learning plans. For Former ELLs, we offer extra help in reading, writing, and math after school, as well as a double period of Math and English. They are also entitled to continue having testing accommodations and services for up to two years after they pass the NYSESLAT. Newcomer students at MVA do not fit the classic profile in that they may have been in the country for less than three years, but who have already had English schooling and place at the Intermediate or Advanced levels. SIFE students are tracked closely by teachers and administration and academic intervention plans are developed and implemented using diagnostic and predictive tests. In general, the ELLs receiving service 4-6 years are also ELL-SWDs; their individual IEPs help to develop our instructional plans for them. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs give students support in learning content and academic language by having them focus on vocabulary development, use adapted materials, and receive instruction in small groups, which accelerate English language acquisition. MVA has an extensive library with books to serve all levels; there is also a computer lab (as well as rolling labs/floating laptops) in which MVA students are encouraged to make use of internet resources such as Brain Pop. ELLs are engaged in a standards-based curriculum that incorporates the CCLS, and is designed to strengthen ELL-SWDs' integrated skills while also helping them develop the higher-order thinking skills they need in order to pass standardized tests in the content areas. The materials we provide are cognitively appropriate and content specific. For example, we use a textbook called "Analytical Reading and Reasoning," which is based on a program to help students develop analytical reading. First we identify their appropriate academic level through diagnostic tests, and then we scaffold instruction. This also helps to accelerate English language acquisition. The special education team meets, reviews IEP needs via SESIS, and then programs students according to their needs. Teachers across the board, in all grades and subject areas, use grade- and age-appropriate materials for ELL-SWDs. Teachers are also mindful to use specific instructional strategies tailored to each individual ELL-SWD, based on his/her IEP. The school ensures that ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs through regular IEP meetings and weekly meetings with teachers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The criteria used to place ELL-SWDs in ICT classes is based on their IEPs and the recommended services indicated. They are learning and attaining English proficiency in the least restrictive environment in that they participate in ICT classes and/or general education classes with SETSS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs, regardless of their subgroup, are expected to complete five portfolios (in ELA, Global History, Math, Globalization, and Physics) over the span of four years, in addition to attaining an advanced Regents diploma. To help our ELLs accomplish this, our school offers targeted intervention programs for ELLs in each of the core content areas (Math, ELA, Science, Social Studies) during our daily PM school and Saturday Academy, which aid ELLs in meeting these requirements by building skills such as 2018-19 CEP 51  reading comprehension and writing through the content areas. Most of the teachers are bilingual in the students' home languages and translate and explain in their home languages when necessary. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, we have found that the introduction of a literacy elective to each student's schedule boosted their Regents, NYSESLAT, and SAT scores. This literacy elective supports the core content areas and strengthens students' analytical reading and writing abilities. With that success in mind, one improvement that will be considered for the upcoming school year is having the ELL teacher push in to the more challenging Advanced Placement (AP) classes in each grade to provide more individualized attention and feedback to ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A - did not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As mentioned earlier, ELLs are afforded supplemental services such as our Summer Bridge program, PM school, and Saturday Academy. Regarding after school programs, ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and encouraged to participate in the MVA community in school programs such as AP and Honors classes, Student Government, MVA Ambassadors/Tour Guide, National Honor Society, Chess Club, MVA Band, and Sports programs such as the Step Team, Cheerleading, Basketball, Baseball, Soccer, and Softball. These programs are advertised through announcements and posters. We have many ELLs who participate in these activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Adapted materials are produced through the collaboration of content-area teachers and the ELL teacher. MVA also has an extensive library with books to serve all levels, including a collection of adapted classics, such as the "Shakespeare No Fear" series. There is also a computer lab (as well as rolling labs/laptops) in which MVA students are encouraged to make use of internet resources, apps, and audio/visuals. Online learning programs such as Castle Learning, Delta Math, and Khan Academy are utilized by teachers. Native language materials such as NYSed bilingual glossaries and Brainpop in alternate languages and closed captions are also used. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We currently do not have DL and TBE programs in our school. Regarding ENL, English is the language of instruction in all content-area classes except for Heritage Spanish, which is offered to 10th and 11th grade students whose native language is Spanish. However, native language is supported through interactive online programs such as Brainpop in alternate languages and closed captions. Support is also provided through dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and through teaching cognates. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The resources used are developmentally appropriate for ELLs' ages and grade levels and content-appropriate. For example, Intermediate ELLs are not given elementary school-level books with juvenile content. Instead, they are upheld to engage in the academic curriculum at MVA, and will read the classics along with their peers, but with adequate support in the form of adapted versions, and pre-teaching of vocabulary and idioms by the ELL teacher. For instance, the book series "Shakespeare Made Easy" publishes the original literature side by side with the colloquial translation; all MVA students, ELLs included, read Romeo and Juliet, Julius Caesar, Macbeth, Othello, and Hamlet using this support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A - our building is not collocated. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 52  Before the beginning of the school year, all newly enrolled ELLs students attend our Summer Bridge enrichment program alongside their non-ELL peers. New ELLs who enroll throughout the school year are paired with a partner in a buddy system, with a peer who speaks the same language and shares the same schedule. These new ELLs also attend our Saturday Academy, where they can work with their teachers to catch up on the work that they missed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school offer two language electives: Spanish and Latin. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A - we do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan that all ELL personnel at the school (including the guidance counselor and specialized teachers such as Special Education and Speech Therapists) participate in on a weekly basis addresses topics such as effective integrated co-teaching, how to design engaging lessons that meet the Common Core Learning Standards with ELLs in mind, as well as the development of critical thinking skills in every subject area. Teachers share student work in order to assess and re-assess the amount of academic rigor and project-based learning that goes into any given unit, and all teachers at each grade level have team meetings once a week to plan and discuss student progress. The pupil secretary and parent coordinator also attend DOE-sponsored Professional Development meetings regarding ELLs. Our administration also regularly emails the staff regarding off-site ELL-related Professional Development opportunities that help teachers in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards and plan for integrated co-teaching, such as Fordham's NYC Regional Bilingual Resource Network (RBE-RN), Teachers College, NYC DOE DELLS, NYC DOE's Literacy/AIS Department, and the UFT. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Professional Development committee at our school, when planning the staff's Professional Development schedule at the beginning of each semester, ensures that the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 are met, which is that 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Our staff meets weekly for Professional Development. The Professional Development Lead keeps records for our school via agendas and attendance. As mentioned earlier, the administration also notifies the staff regarding offsite ELL Professional Development opportunities offered by organizations such as Fordham's NYC Regional Bilingual Resource Network (RBE-RN), Teachers College, NYC DOE DELLS, NYC DOE's Literacy/AIS Department, and the UFT. Many of our teachers opt to attend these events after school, on Saturdays, and on Chancellor's Days. Thus, each teacher keeps his/her own individual records via agendas and attendance as well. 2018-19 CEP 53  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs mid-year to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This meeting includes school staff, such as the ELL teacher and the core content teachers, who thoroughly inform the parents about the child's language development in all content areas. Parents' preferred languages are considered, according to the languages indicated on their blue cards. The Language Access Coordinator also utilizes the Language Access Toolkit provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist parents. Personal translators, bilingual teachers, as well as over-the-phone translation services are available from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Also, after every diagnostic, predictive, and in-house periodic assessment that the ELLs take every 3-4 months, all teachers (including the ELL teacher and content area teachers) hold individual meetings with parents to discuss language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in each content area. This is a separate meeting that does not include the mandated parent orientation meeting nor the DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Records are kept for annual individual meetings with ELL parents, and outreach is executed to ensure parents' needs are accommodated via in-person meetings, phone calls, and letters. The ELL teacher keeps a binder of documents as well as a record book that keeps track of all of this information. ELL parents are actively involved in school through the Thanksgiving Feast, Multicultural Night, the Mother's Day celebration, Awards Night, Meet the Teachers/Curriculum Night, School Leadership meetings, College Information Nights, and FAFSA information sessions. The families of ELLs at MVA are also included in the school community through MVA’s monthly Parent-Teacher Association meetings, school information that is accessible on the school website, regular contact between advisers and parents that evaluates the needs of parents, and translated material sent home in high-incidence languages. At MVA, the parent coordinator, social worker, and health aide offer resources in high-incidence languages. Furthermore, all teachers use the online gradebook Pupil Path as a platform for parent communication; all parents are instructed on how to sign up, log-in, and keep track of their child's performance. Parents' preferred languages are considered, according to the languages indicated on their blue cards. The Language Access Coordinator also utilizes the Language Access Toolkit provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist parents. Personal translators, bilingual teachers, as well as over-the-phone translation services are available from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Hector Geager, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Manhattan Village Academy School DBN: 02M439 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Hector Geager Title Principal Rickey Brown Assistant Principal Ircania Vega Esther Cho Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Randy Jaquez Parent - - - - - - - - - - Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Data Person Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 - - - - - - - - - - 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M439 School Name: Manhattan Village Academy Superintendent: M.Bradbury The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ircania Vega Parent Coordinator and Yes Yes Language Access Coordinator * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, information is culled from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) during the intake interview, the ATS report of preferred languages (RAPL), as well as the blue Student Emergency contact cards, which are collected within the first few days of school. Parent Surveys are also conducted by the Parent Association, and teachers also conduct their own individual surveys. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese (Any) Cantonese Dzongkha French Mandinka Mandarin Nahuatl Nepali English Polish Russian Senufo Slovak Spanish Tibetan Twi 1 6 9 16 0 1 1 1 0 1 3 281 4 2 1 1 251 0 1 0.17 1.03 1.55 2.76 0 0.17 0.17 0.17 0 0.17 0.52 48.45 0.69 0.34 0.17 0.17 43.28 0 0.17 1 6 12 8 2 1 1 1 6 1 3 276 4 3 1 0 251 2 0 0.17 1.03 2.07 1.38 0.34 0.17 0.17 0.17 1.03 0.17 0.52 47.59 0.69 0.52 0.17 0 43.28 0.34 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 58  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Welcome Letter August Beginning-of-the-year handbooks September Monthly school newsletters Every month Individual attendance statistics letters Every month Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. 2018-19 CEP 59  Parent-teacher conference announcements November, January, March, April Curriculum Night September New York State testing dates December and May When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 60  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences November, January, March, April Curriculum Night September Annual ELL meeting with parents January IEP meetings with Special Ed parents (times vary). Throughout the year (times vary) interpretation service(s)? Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation 2018-19 CEP 61  Parent Association meetings Every month School Leadership Team meetings Every month Thanksgiving Feast November Mother’s Day celebration May to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, 2018-19 CEP 62  Awards Night April Multicultural Night May then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. Documents are translated by our multilingual school staff, especially our Parents Coordinator at least a month ahead of time. When there is a language that our multilingual school staff cannot speak, then we send a request for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, which are submitted at a month ahead of time. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school staff sends multilingual mass emails and phone calls in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This information is disseminated during our weekly Professional Development meetings as well as our monthly School Safety meetings to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of this Regulation and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Any time a parent enters the school building, we fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, by providing each parent who require language assistance services with a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretations services. Translated versions of this document are available. Our school also posts signs in each of the covered languages in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance of the school a sign, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Parents' Guide to Language Access is provided to parents and the Language ID Guide is also provided at security desk and the main office. In addition, our school's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If there is a primary language that is neither English, nor a covered language (the nine most common primary languages other than English), but parents of more than 10% of children speak it, then our school obtains from the Translation & Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required, and posts and provides such forms accordingly. We also direct all parents to utilize the NYC DOE's website, which also provides information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Additionally, flyers sent from the DOE to the principal are shared with the Parent Coordinator, who then refers to the schools.nyc.gov website for access to the flyer translated in the covered languages, before conducting the mass mailing. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents of the quality and availability of services through parent surveys every spring. Questions are asked such as “Is there another language that we can service you in?” Parents are also invited to directly communicate with the principal; he has an open-door policy, which many parents take advantage of by dropping by school to meet with him. We also schedule a focus group of parents, inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school, to gather feedback and best practices. 2018-19 CEP 64 
