2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M462 School Name: THE COLLEGE ACADEMY Principal: TIMOTHY SIGERSON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The College Academy 310600011462 9-12 School Number (DBN): M462 549 Audubon Ave. New York, NY 10040 212-972-1841 212-927-2388 Phone Number: Timothy Sigerson Fax: TSigerson@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Timothy Sigerson Jocelyn Aponte Judy Antonini Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Meghan McDonough SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Judy Antonini AislymAlmonte LeslyHernandez none Geographical District: 6 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, NY, NY 10033 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave, 8 th Floor, NY, NY 10001 YChhu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Timothy Sigerson Jocelyn Aponte Judy Antonini Rosa Tavarez Judy Antonini Aislym Almonte LeslyHernandez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Meghan McDonough Member/SLTChairperson VilmaHurtado Daryen Mirabal Member/ UFT Representative Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AlexandraGarcia VeneciaEstrella Lesly Hernandez Alba Rodriguez George FelizJr. Andrea Moya DaliaJimenez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview College Academy Mission Statement: Dedication to high academic achievement through collaboration, inspiration, and community. The College Academy is a community of learners working together to ensure that every student achieves college or career readiness through individualized social, emotional, physical, and academic nourishment. We believe every student, including English Language Learners and students with special needs, can persevere to develop the important skills critical for success in the modern workplace, such as verbal and written communication, mathematics, use of technology for work and research, the ability to work with others, and conduct their lives with responsibility. The College Academy is confident that we provide and sustain a safe and positive learning environment through a rigorous educational program that includes daily attendance, parental involvement, positive behavior, academic engagement, and data-driven decision making. Students rise to the challenge of high expectations that staff have set for them to achieve college or career readiness. In our school, students tackle tough challenges with grit and perseverance in order to build character and become productive members of society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The College Academy is located in the vibrant community of Washington Heights in historic Upper Manhattan. It is a rich blend of cultures; residents welcome newly-arrived immigrants from countries all over the world with most coming from the Dominican Republic with an increasing number of immigrants coming from Mexico, Central and South American countries and Middle Eastern countries. The neighborhood hosts businesses large and small, a world class university, and medical center. Our school enjoys wide community and family support. We serve 429 students, primarily of Hispanic heritage, in grades 9-12. In order to support our students we have established robust and varied during and after-school collaborations, partnerships, and initiatives are designed to support student engagement in the community. Academic o Summer Bridge Academy program to introduce our new students to high school courses and transition to our school o Credit accumulation Winter and Spring Academy o AP for ALL offers support to AP teachers to increase the number of students participating and succeeding in AP courses ( AP courses offered in Spanish Literature, English Language and Composition, English Literature, Biology, Calculus, and US History) o Monroe College offers our students Presidential Scholarships o College Now through City College offers students an opportunity to enroll in college classes. o Saturday Academy provides students with tutoring, remediation, and Regents practice. Additional focus on ELL students with intensive ENL class offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  o Bridges to Academic Success courses for SIFE students provided through our partnership with Fordham University and CUNY o People’s Theater Project partners with our teachers to integrate the arts and address social justice themes (immigration, discrimination, school to prison pipeline) while developing collaborative skills and academic language o Awards ceremony to acknowledge student academic achievement and progress throughout the school year all grades. The annual College ‘Academy Awards’ celebrates student achievements, both academic and socio-emotional for all grades. o Partnership with the campus Student Success Center supports students with college applications, financial aid, and college tours. o Access VR program assists Students with Disabilities in transitioning to careers and for post-secondary career opportunities o We have invested in Naviance to support our students with college applications and tools to identify potential career pathway Extracurricular o PSAL sports, supported by staff and we have dozens of student athletes who participate. o Band – Students learn to play instruments and perform during school functions with NYC Renaissance. o Dance – Performs routines with different genres, run by a teacher, Mr. J. Rodriguez. o Clubs: Including Gamer, Cosmetology, Art, Athletics, and Photography o Student Council Organization Social- Emotional Supports o New York Presbyterian hospital has an on-site clinic offering students medical and psychological care. o Peer Health Exchange: Peer Health Exchange empowers young people to make healthy decisions by providing a comprehensive health curriculum that builds skills, teaches critical health content, and helps students access resources in their schools and communities. o Other collaborations organized by our guidance counselors include Catholic Charities (formerly known as Alianza Dominicana), Northern Manhattan Coalition, Madison Square Garden, Guest Bridge program, Columbia University College of Dental Medicine, and The Opportunity Network. Community Service o Participation in community service initiatives (Breast Cancer walk, AIDS walk) Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  o Parent University offers ENL classes for parents and extended family once a week o Manhattan District Attorney’s Office works with communities and families to provide social services as well as a summer program for students with interests in criminal justice 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.  94% qualify for free/reduced lunch  51.5% ELL, requiring ENL classes and bilingual content classes.  11.3% Students with Interrupted Formal Education requiring intensive remedial skills including building foundational literacy and math skills. Many of the students in this group have readings levels below 4th grade in their Native Language.  We are also 17.4 % Students with Disabilities including ICT, SETTS, and Alternate Assessment Programs. The students in this group require integrated co-teaching settings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of Progress and Focus: Progress  According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, our school made the most progress in establishing trusting relationships which went from 2.90 to 3.86.  According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, a focus area for our school is Rigorous Instruction which went from 3.39 0 to 3.64 Areas of Focus  Attendance: Our average attendance rate in 2017-2018 was 85%. Our students with over 90% attendance rates reduced by 3% from the 2016-2017 school year. As such, we want to focus on increasing the percentage of students with over 90% attendance.  Based on thoughtful data evaluation of 2017 Regents scores data, classroom assessments, and teacher feedback, The College Academy’s administration created our instructional focus is to build advanced literacy skills through a balanced literacy approach in order to foster the development of academic language; ensure understanding of academic writing and speaking; and deepen knowledge of abstract concepts and ideas.  This area will be the focus of our 2017-2018 Professional Learning Community where teachers will conduct rounds of inter-visitation, feedback, and sharing best practices with the full staff so that high standards are uniform in every classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M462 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 460 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 52 5 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 55 37 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.5% % Reduced Lunch 48.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 88.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.17 4% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 51% 46% 50.5% 5.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No No No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A N/A No N/A 77 74 81.5% 3.7% 17.2% 9.3% 0.0% 0.7% 6 38% 7.6 N/A N/A 61% 46% 68.2% 12% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According 2018 Regents data, The College Academy was below city average in weighted Regents passing rates in all subject areas. Additionally, 1.2 (Rigorous Instruction) continues to be an area of focus based on our 2018 School Quality Guide. When we disaggregated our data, it was evident that our English Language Learners would most benefit from more rigorous instruction and a focus on developing advanced literacy skills to succeed academically. Our average score for English Language Learners was 10 points lower than our non-ELL students according to the June 2018 item skill analysis report (ISA). As such, a focus area for our school is supporting teachers to adjust and refine curricula to meet the needs of all our learners so that it is rigorous and advances academic language, daily writing, and opportunities fo interactions to build advanced literacy skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will show progress in the English Language Arts Regents as indicated by a 10% increase of students passing as measured by the School Performance Dashboard. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Data & Assessment All Students  The ELA Teacher team will engage in Regents data analysis Teachers using the Item Skills Analysis in June 2018, September 2018, and March 2019 using data driven protocols.  Team Facilitator will meet as a school wide Inquiry Team to organize and coordinate the work to result in consistent practice across classrooms.  Datawise team identified standard R3 in part 1 of English Regents as a focus standard for Feb- May 2019 Strategies to Address Student Needs  We will offer classes during our Saturday Academy to provided targeted Regents Preparation based on data from ISA and Mock Regents exams.  Regents Prep Intensive Academy offered before January and June regents MLL/SIFE Grades 10, 11, 12 September 2018- June 2019 Team Facilitators, Teacher Leaders, Principal/ Assistant Principal October 2018- June 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal Instructional Actions/Strategies/Activities All Students  Teachers will plan instruction using the SIOP framework to Teachers ensure consistency and active development of academic language through content and language objectives. September 2018- June 2018 Assistant Principals, Department Teams, Teacher Leaders Teachers will use findings from data to develop and/or adjust curricula to:     identify the standards and learning targets which are to be measured for each unit include a specific pre and post assessment designed to measure student growth; include an exemplar that communicates to students the learning expectations for the unit include a performance task that is aligned to CCLS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18 All teachers, school building leaders. September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Department Chairs  provide access for all students to cognitively challenging tasks that involve higher order-thinking skills Teachers will provide many opportunities for students to take responsibility for their own learning:  Student self-assessment using rigorous, standards-based rubrics  Peer assessment   Constructing rigorous tasks that will engage our ELLs Student-to-student discussions through multiple linguistic entry points Professional Development Teachers and administrators will attend learning sessions on Close Reading Strategies for preparing ELL students to succeed on each part of the ELA Regents (Fordham RBRN) Professional Learning Community: Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and the Brain by Zaretta Hammond in order to understand neuroscience research in order to learn innovative approaches for designing and implementing brain-compatible culturally responsive instruction. Teachers will learn the following:  Information on how one's culture programs the brain to process data and affects learning relationships  Ten "key moves" to build students' learner operating systems and prepare them to become independent learners  Techniques for action and self-reflection  ELA Teacher team will engage in Professional Learning Communities based to monitor student progress and identify instructional strategies to support greater student engagement  Create and implement a professional development calendar for all teachers using Advance data to inform differentiated professional development in a collaborative setting using small groups PD ,and various coaching models (peer inter-visitation, demonstrations, study groups, and individual support) To improve teacher practice in Engagement and Assessment for Teacher Leaders will: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Actively participate in the Professional Learning committee to support structuring and designing professional learning for the school community  Coordinate intervisitation and maintain labsites for professional learning Parent Involvement and Engagement  Newsletters to inform parents of specific strategies students  are learning across the school Increased communication to inform parents of credit requirement.  Meeting with parent/families, school building leaders, and guidance counselors to develop individualized action plans to support progress toward success on the Regents exam. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Families and Parents September 2018- June 2019 Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, School Leaders, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Involvement and Engagement Increased communication to inform parents of tutoring opportunities and student opportunities.   Meetings with teacher teams and families during parent conferences and open school sessions (September 2018, November 2018 , March 2019, May 2019  Parent workshops to inform parents about credit requirements, Advanced Placement opportunities, and to teach them ways to support their child’s academic success. September 2018, December 2019 - Guidance Counselors, Principal, Assistant Principals  Parent workshops on IO Classroom to help them access student data (attendance, assignments, grades) on a regular basis September 2018  Elevate Education Study Skills (How to Support Skills at Home) December 2019- Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Elevate Consultant  Parent workshops will focus on college readiness ( College admissions process, Understanding Naviance Reports) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers meet during common planning time for professional development and department team meetings. Designated instructional leads are part of our school’s instructional cabinet. We take advantage of professional development opportunities offered by the Manhattan Field Support Center, The Division of English Language Learners, and our district. We send teachers and administrators to professional development off campus, as well as administrative development in Danielson observations and constructive feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20   Per Diem funding will be used to take advantage of professional learning opportunities through our partnership with Fordham University and CUNY for the Bridges to Academic Success curriculum for our SIFE students October 2018, November 2018.  We will offer per-session planning opportunities for teacher teams to analyze student work and develop lesson/ unit plans to support meeting student needs and designing more rigorous tasks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, we will analyze mock Regents and January Regents results will show an increase of 7% on regents pass rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January Regents item skills analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school staff values collaboration and understand that working together to create a safe and positive learning learning environment is important to helping our students engage in rigorous academics and feel supported in our school. The aforementioned is evidenced in our school quality guide indicates that 100% teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. A focus on supportive environment can increase data trends, such as attendance. If we work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and inclusive then our attendance rates will improve. In June of 2018, our 4 year graduation rate was over 70% and our attendance rates were below city average Students with 90% or greater attendance rates dropped by 3%. As such, we will focus on increasing attendance rates. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The College Academy will increase the percentage of students with 90%+ attendance by 5% from SY 2017-18, through close monitoring by our attendance committee and increasing parent outreach as measured by the School Performance dashboard. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The school will create an attendance team consisting of key members of the school staff including the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Pupil Personnel Secretary, Attendance Teacher, Family Worker, and Guidance Counselors. All Students September 2018- June 2019 During weekly meetings, the team will monitor student attendance trends by reviewing various ATS reports, and other student data in order to implement strategies to improve attendance including incentives to promote to attendance rates. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Attendance Team Attendance Team Parents and families will receive daily phone calls to inform them if their child is absent or late to school. For students who exceed two unexcused absences during a calendar month, parents will be requested to attend a meeting with members of the team to work in developing an individualized plan to improve student attendance. All Students Parents & Families September 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Attendance Team  Attendance in classes  Prompt arrival to school  Prompt arrival to classes All Students September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Periodic celebrations for students achieving perfect and improved attendance rates. Home visits will be made to the homes of all students absent for more than three consecutive days unless appropriate communication/documentation is received indicating the necessity to miss school (death in the family, illness, etc.) All Students September 2018- June 2019 The team will develop an individualized plan for all chronically absent students, resulting in individual follow-up with the student and family, and the creation of an action plan to support improved student attendance. Chronic Absentees September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Attendance Team  An attendance contract will be instituted between chronically absent students, their parents/guardians, and the school. It will spell out the supports and incentives students will receive for improving attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24   Attendance goals communicated to all staff and parents, displayed in schools. Additional Family Workers hired to increase outreach and home-visits to chronic/long term absentees Chronic Absentees Chronically absent students will be assigned an individual staff member to conduct weekly check-ins with the students Chronic Absentees September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team All teachers, staff, and school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents and families will receive daily phone calls to inform them if their child is absent or late to school. School-wide attendance updates at Parent meetings and via newsletter to parents   Parents meetings with members of the Attendance Team to work on developing an individualized plan to improve student attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Family Worker, Attendance Teacher, Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  The Guidance and Attendance teams meet to discuss student progress and create an action plan    School Aides support us in making daily attendance phone calls to notify parents. Funds allocated for awards ceremonies and incentives to support increasing attendance Student schedules adjusted so that students have a full schedule to support them in staying on track towards graduation. 2. Guidance counselors conduct regular Town Hall meetings. 4. Per session offered for Supervisors, Guidance Counselors and Teachers for facilitating orientations, parent meetings and workshops to support students and families, awards ceremonies outside of the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the percentage of students with 90%+ attendance will have reached (or exceeded) a 3% increase as measured by RCUA report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use ATS report, RCUA (Cumulative Absence Report) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has hired two teacher leaders, a Master Teacher and a Model teacher that work collaboratively with our school leaders to ensure that instructional practices are organized by units. They are working to create entry points for English Language Learners using our challenging curriculum. We recently adopted a new English Language Arts curriculum and Math curriculum to help students develop the advanced literacy and math skills necessary to graduate High School graduation and college and career readiness. ENL (51.5%) SIFE (11.3%) SWD (17.4%) Our 2018 Regents data show that our pass rate English Language Learners and Students with disabilities. is lower than our non-ELL students. As such, by June 2019, teacher teams will engage in structured cycles of inquiry using effective data analysis protocols to target ELLs and SWD to identify the skills our students need to improve in order to improve achievement on regents exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will engage in data-based protocols to analyze formative and summative assessments resulting in a 5% increase of average regents completion as measured by the NYC School Performance Dashboard. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Teachers will refine and adjust standards-based units, Core subject  analyzing assessments from these units using data driven protocols in order to plan future instruction. Incorporate Elevate Learning strategies for note-taking and close reading in order create consistent routines and expectations for all students. teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, School-wide data team  Using data from formative and summative assessments, participants collaboratively research, plan, teach and observe a series of lessons, using ongoing discussion, reflection and to track and refine their interventions. Core subject teachers October 2018- May 2019 Department leaders, Assistant Principals, Teacher leaders Support Co-teaching partnerships with professional learning and coaching Co-teaching models Beyond structures, collecting data and planning to meet the needs of all students ELL and SWD (all students) September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Professional Learning Team Co-teaching partnerships Coteaching Professional Learning Series ELA teachers earn TESOL certification through a partnership with St. John's University.  Department teams will meet and engage in the Data analysis protocols to monitor adjustments made to instructional practices based upon teacher collaborations. All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 School-wide data team, School Leaders, Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  o This process will include debriefs of instructional All Teachers walk-throughs, and analysis of various student data resulting in adjustments of the professional learning plan Partner with NYC Teaching Collaborative to mentor 5 pre-service teachers and provide additional support for small group Leaders, Professional Learning Team Provide expanded learning time on Saturdays, after school, and during the February and April break to target students academic needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students Grade 9-12 All students September 2018- June 2019 AP Supervision and department Instructional Leads How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and teacher teams by sharing promising practices and instructional strategies during parent workshops, newsletters, and parent meetings. Parent Coordinator, Department Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal September 2018- May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per Diem funding for teachers and leaders to attend Data Wise learning series offered by MFSC 2. Coordinate weekly administrative instructional meetings to develop data based planning for student achievement by subject area. 5. Resource alignment will be used for professional development on promising practices for ELL and SWD  Elevate Learning Teachers will and Supervisor will be paid per session for the development of units of study with the SIOP model incorporated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Professional development will be provided during the Chancellor’s PD day, weekly Professional Development sessions, and during common planning time. Leverage Google Apps for Education Resources and School-wide administrator We will purchase professional literature to support learning in our professional learning communities  Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and the Brain by Zaretta Hammond  Data Wise by Kathryn Park Boudett/ Elizabeth A. City/ Richard J. Murnane  Teaching to Transform: An Instructional Practice Guide to Support Struggling Readers and Writers in Grades 6-12 Field Support Center supports professional development for data analysis and data driven instruction.  Schedule weekly administrative instructional meetings to develop data based planning for student achievement by subject Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, we will have 50% of our students to be one regents away from the required average regents completion for their respective grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Graduation Tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has increased the school leadership has improved instructional leadership in the last year according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. 96% of teachers agreed that the the school leader makes expectations clear for meeting instructional goals. Our trust between the principal and teacher was 90% percent positive. A priority area for our school is creating a more supportive environment for our students. According to the 2017-2018, School Quality Guide- School Conditions and Practices, our overall score was under 3. Additionally, student responses to questions about preventing Bullying was only 50% positive. Furthermore, classroom behavior and peer support for academic work was below 70% positive. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The College Academy's score for supportive environment will increase by 5% as measured by the School Quality Guide- School Conditions and Practice report through the implementation of Positive Behavior Supports and Intervention, Advisory, and Restorative justice practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student Council will meet on a monthly basis to discuss areas of concern and collaborate on programming and activities to address bullying. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals, Small group advisory for all students using curriculum driven by School Connect and modified by TCA grade advisory teams. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals • Provide students with strategies through instruction and support, that lead to the academic behaviors of effective students ( School Connect Curriculum, Advisory, Elevate Education) All Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, School Leaders  Data from Advance and behavioral referrals will be used to provide targeted professional development to support the following areas: All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Professional Learning Committee Domain 2 ( Classroom Management and Creating and Environment of Respect and Rapport) Principal, Assistant Principal, and Model Teacher participate in the Growth Mindset Institute to provide research based interventions that support students in developing the academic mindset that support achievement. Participants will design professional learning opportunities to share interventions with the staff. Principal and Assistant Principals will engage in leadership coaching, data analysis, reflection, and action planning as part of a 2 day retreat. Formed an Advisory Exploratory Committee to revise the structure of advisory All students , teachers October 2018-December 2018 Model Teacher , Assistant Principal, Principal June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principal All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal, Dean of Climate and Culture 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Partner with Development without Limits (strengthen teacher capacity to teacher core SEL competencies) Increase opportunities for teachers to develop their leadership skills through participation in the following: All Staff September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals  Professional development committee  Attendance team  School-wide Data team Identify staff to participate in showcase school visits "Redefining Discipline" to learn restorative practices. All teachers February- March 2019 AP Supervision, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent meetings with the Principal will keep parents informed of our school's structures and planned activities for students to address diversity, bias, and bullying. We will work collaboratively with our Parent Coordinator and Margaret's Room social workers to design programming for parents to help strengthen communication between parents and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school adjusted the schedule to include time for every student to have an Advisory period led by a member of our staff so each advisory class size is reduced. Purchase a social-emotional learning curriculum- School Connect Curriculum to be implemented to during the advisory period. Our school hired a Dean of Climate and Culture to support students and staff in the implementation of restorative practices Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school 's supportive environment survey will show a 3% increase in positive responses on school environment survey measures . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Midpoint Benchmark: Our school will develop a survey that mirrors the NYC School Survey for the Supportive Environment to administer to Teachers and Students Yearly goal will be measured by the NYC School Quality Guide School Condition and Practices. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Snapshot, our college and career readiness score (24%). These are measurements of how well students are prepared for life after high school on the basis of passing advanced courses, meeting rigorous English and math standards, and enrolling in a post-secondary institution. Our most recent Quality Review, noted that school leaders and faculty have high expectations for students and communicate effectively with parents so that there is ongoing feedback to families to help them understand their child’s progress in being college and career ready. In addition, administration has refined systems to ensure that faculty receives targeted support aligned to Danielson Framework for Teaching for improved. To build upon our strengths and with a focus on our next step, we determined that focus area for our school is to ensure that regular communication with students and families fosters high expectations for student achievement, we believe that increasing community and family involvement to help them understand our expectations for student achievement and their progress in school will help our students stay on track for graduation and on path to college and careers that will enrich communities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The College Academy will increase family participation in events and the decision-making process as measured by a 5% increase in the parental response rate on the New York City School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Conduct a parent survey on topics of interest to parents and identify 4-6 topics around which to plan parent engagement activities. Families Sept. 2018-June 2019  Develop a twitter account to broaden connections with Families parents  Announcements about events and learning opportunities Families will be included on the school website, calendars, fliers, newsletters, IO classroom emails, and the Remind communication system  Distribute monthly event calendars highlighting dates for parent events/workshops February 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019  Arrange more flexible times for parent meetings (morning, Families evening, and weekends.) Sept. 2018-June 2019 Offer parent workshops on throughout the year on the following topics: Families Sept. 2018- June 2019  navigating the school/ resources to parents college application process  career readiness  internship opportunities,   dual language programs   health    parenting skills  other topics per parent survey accessing community and support services adult learning (ENL and technology classes) graduation requirements and assessment expectations Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  o intervention opportunities (Saturday Academy, Credit Accumulation Opportunities, and progress toward graduation) Families  Each advisor will schedule an appointment with each advisee’s during which time students will review their progress by examining student work and grades. We will work collaboratively with the PTA, Parent Coordinator, and the SLT to continuously plan effective ways to improve parent engagement. Families  The school will implement the Pupilpath system to inform parents about student progress towards goals. o Pupilpath tutorial for all parents during parent engagement time/computers available for parents to log into Pupil path accounts with support from our staff (1-1 tutorials). Sept. 2018-Dec. 2018 Feb. 2019 –June. 2019 Sept. 2018-June. 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors Monthly recognition ceremonies to celebrate parent involvement in addition to student achievement in the arts, community involvement, academics, positive behaviors, and attendance. Families Sept. 2018-June. 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, PA President, Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. To increase family- community ties and supports (Time for planning, refreshments, material a. The school will host a curriculum night in September, to introduce and/or reinforce the Regents examination requirements for each student. b. College Workshops featuring post-secondary institutions Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage the following resources to help us achieve this annual goal: translation services, postal budget, per-session for evening events, community partnerships to provide workshops, budget for catering and supplies, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  partnerships with CBOs, colleges, and universities, common planning for teachers to update their digital grade book and family engagement time for teachers to respond to parent phone calls and emails. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, TCA will note an increase in participation of parents at events as measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent workshop agendas and attendance sheets . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Multilingual Screener, NYSITELL ENL assessments, baselineassessments STAR Assessment, benchmark assessments-year, Regents data, middle school assessment data, Portfolio pieces. Mathematics ENL assessments, baseline assessment (STAR Assessment) Regents data, middle school assessment data, performance based assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Summer Bridge Academy for incoming 9th and 10th grade students. Focused reading ● Newcomers Institute and Intensive ENL tutoring for students with low English and Spanish literacy skills. ● Bridges Curriculum Intervention for SIFE students ● Integrated ENL and ELA ● AP English Literature- Summer Academy Great Leaps Fluency ● Skills-based targeted support Saturday Academy small group tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● The AIS elective classes are small and the students are determined through data analysis and teacher referral. ● Targeted teaching of small groups – no more than 20. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Before, during, and after school Newcomers Institute and Intensive ENL tutoring is offered after school and on Saturday. ● The AIS elective classes are small and the students are identified through data analysis and teacher referral. ● Targeted teaching is provided during and after school and on Saturday. ● Newcomers Institute is offered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Science Unit Assessments, Lab Completion rates, , baseline, benchmark assessments-year, Regents data, middle school assessment data, Skedula anecdotal data, Mock Regents. Social Studies Unit Assessments, Mock Regents, Assessments, baseline, benchmark assessments-year, Regents data, middle school assessment data, Skedula anecdotal data. after school and Saturdays ● Targeted teaching of small groups – no more than 20. ● Targeted teaching of small groups – no more than 20. ● TheAISelective classes are small and the students are identified through data analysis and teacher referral. ● Targeted teaching of small groups – no more than 20. ● The AIS elective classes are small and the students are determined through data analysis and teacher referral. ● Targeted teaching of small groups – no more than 20 ● Targeted teaching is provided during and after school and on Saturday. ● Newcomers Institute and Intensive ESL tutoring is offered after school and on Saturday. Kahn Academy ● Focused reading ● Targeted skills-based instruction ● Inclusion of a literacy unit in all Science Curricula. ● AP summer institute prepares students for the rigor of AP science courses ●AP Expansion offers support to AP teachers in science to increase the number of students participating in AP courses and being successful in them. ● Focused reading ●Targeted skill based support (Saturday Academy) ● Specialized elective classes for every AIS student’s program 5x/week. The Historical Writing Elective was created to focus on improving students’ writing skills ● Newcomers Institute and Intensive ENL tutoring for students with low English and Spanish literacy skills in writing and reading 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 comprehension. The students increase literacy in both languages with a focus on history ● AP US History Summer Institute ● Students are provided with continuous counseling with our guidance counselors and the social worker. ● Referrals to on-site clinical supports provided ● Counseling and one-on-one therapy and group therapy. ● Advisory classes are capped at 20. ● Services are provided during the school day or Saturdays ● Advisory is provided during the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● IEP, teacher’s referrals, classroom observations, assessment and attendance data. Pupil Personal Team (PPT) and SIT recommendations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 110 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing are provided with Uniforms and school supplies such as notebooks, pencils, paper, folders, and backpacks. Students are also paired with a mentor to check-in regularly. We also support students other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) and an adviser so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Attend teacher recruitment fairs and hire educators that are highly qualified to teach core subjects or who have dual certification 3. With the use of Title 1 funding, monetarily support teachers who lack the required courses or exams to become highly qualified 4. Our school has a Model and Master Teacher used to support the administration in developing high quality professional learning opportunities for all instructional staff. Our Teacher leaders also provide demo-lessons, run 2 lab sites for colleagues to observe promising practices in action. Our new teachers have mentors to help provide more individualized professional learning. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. We have programmed the school so that all students have lunch the same period to allow teachers to meet for common planning, professional development and grade team meetings as needed. We designated instructional leads, use city supports for professional development sessions; we send teachers and administrators to professional development off campus, as well as administrative development in Danielson observations and constructive feedback. The focus of our professional learning community is cycles of inter-visitations using teacher made, school-wide protocols and then sharing best practices. 2. The data specialist assists departments in using data from interim assessments to plan lessons to target students’ needs. Teachers utilize Datacation services such as Skedula and Data Driven Classroom to align exams to Common Core standards and to assess which standards require more targeted interventions. 3. City PDs are offered on campus for both teachers and administrators such as Special Education School Improvement Services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  4. Administrators receive PDs off campus on leadership, Effective teacher practice, Office of DELL services, Testing coordination, Common Core implementation, etc. 5. Para-professionals are invited to participate in our professional learning sessions understand the different instructional strategies that can be used to support student learning. Paraprofessionals will participate in our SIOP PD this professional learning sessions will support students in understanding content across the instructional core. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Administrators have provided PD on how to create and analyze meaningful assessment that drive teacher lesson planning and classroom instruction. Teachers are required to have baseline, benchmark, and final assessments but the number and type of interim assessments is decided by teachers based on skills requirements. Teachers are required to produce data streams for students indicating student progress, areas for student growth, and teacher interventions to address those areas, in both content and CCLS skills. Teachers get to decide the best methods for their data stream report such as using individual binders, Data Driven Classroom, or other spreadsheets. The ENL department uses NYSITELL, LAB-R, Multilingual Screener, and NYSESLAT data as to class placement and curriculum creation. Professional Learning Community has discussions on whether assessment goals were reached and methods to improve assessment implementation and data analysis. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 338,371.00 0 0 0 24,656.00 0 3,009,764.00 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E n/a n/a n/a 5A-5E n/a 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The College Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The College Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template The College Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: We know that one of the biggest challenges our English Language Learners face is building the advanced literacy skills needed to ensure the understanding of academic writing and speaking; and deepen knowledge of abstract skills and concepts necessary for success in college. According to our 2018 NYSESLAT results, 46 students attained a raw score between 0 and 4 (low) on the speaking and writing modalities on the NYSESLAT. These scores contributed to an entering, emerging, or stagnation at the transitioning level. We conducted a needs assessment, asking students what will help them stay engaged and learn language in different way than they do in their standard classes. The students expressed a strong interest in using a tech-based program. Student members of our School Leadership Team connected our team to a program they used in middle school. We conducted additional research and identified a strong fit for our students. We will be using iLit ELL. 9th Grade 20 students 10th Grade 15 students 11th Grade 11 students The College Academy’s vision is to provide access to college to all students in our school; therefore, we offer school programs and supplemental services to support all our English Language Learners to be college and career ready by the time they graduate from our school. We are offering our students a Title III Saturday Academy. For 30 Saturdays between November and May, our students attend our school from 9 am to 12:00pm (3 hours) to work in small class size groups (up to 15 students) 2 certified ENL Teachers, 1 certified English teacher to focus on developing writing and speaking skills. Students will work with each teacher for 1 hour. As such, they will spend 2 hours with an ENL teacher and 1 hour with a ELA teacher. Students are engaged in instructional time to support their reading, listening, speaking and writing skills in their new language. Our school will purchase iLit ELL. iLit ELL is a comprehensive suite of literacy solutions designed to supplement instruction. It combines high interest, standards-aligned digital print and digital learning experiences to help students develop the language and literacy skills needed for success in their core classes. iLit ELL addresses language development across all modalities. The instructional model will be the gradual release model. The teachers will model, students and teacher contribute ideas as a group, small group (students apply the skill) as the teacher support students. Finally, students apply the skill independently. Students will use iPads to access iLit ELL and teachers will use the digital boards to teach the whole group segment of the lesson. iLit includes a diagnostic assessment that supports students in applying skills at their instructional and independent levels. Teachers are able to get immediate insights to student learning as data is reported back to the teacher to inform next instructional steps. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Our ENL teachers will work collaboratively with our content teacher to use the New York State English Language Arts Progressions to build on students new language skills. Students are engaged in speaking, listening, reading and writing activities. In order to help students build advanced literacy skills, we will incorporate the SIOP model, (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) to ensure that teachers are addressing the content objectives of their discipline, but also the language objectives. Using data from the 2018 NYSESLAT assessment in addition to other formative and summative assessments, our teachers will provide targeted instruction to our students to develop speaking and writing skills. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Our school has tailored all professional developments based on student's and teacher’s needs. We are using all the tools NY State is sharing with schools to support teachers enhance their practices. Our school school will focus on three professional development themes for the 2018-2019 school year (Planning and Preparation, Engagement, and Assessment). Our goal is to provide our teachers of English Language Learners targeted and differentiated professional learning opportunities to support them in serving the needs of our English Language Learners. Our teachers will continue to build upon the work we began in the 2017-2018 school year on the SIOP model and focus on refining language and content objectives in the 2018-`19 school year. We will continue to refine our understanding and enhance our pedagogy using SIOP strategies to make content comprehensible to English Language Learners. We will implement this approach school wide to ensure consistency in every content classroom as teachers add language objectives to their lessons. The College Academy has hired one Model Teacher and one Master Teacher. We will leverage our teacher leaders' capacity to support teachers through peer coaching, intervisitations, and planning professional learning. September 2018 Facilitators: Principal, Assistant Principal School vision, Introductions and expectations – Advanced Regents for All Grading policy review to set up marking periods, review entering parent contact anecdotal, and creating assignments for data stream.(1.1, 1.2, 4.2) SESIS Training and 408 Compliance - Identifying Students with needs (ELL, SPED, Lowest third).(1.2, 1.4, 3.1) Teaching Study Skills Series: Elevate Eucation. Facilitators: Elevate Consultants Provider: Elevate Education https://us.elevateeducation.com/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development Rationale: In order to deepen rigor in the classrooms for our English Language Learners, we want to use consistent school-wide protocols for close reading, note-taking, and teaching study skills. By reducing the instructional time dedicated to teaching different techniques in each subject area, we hope to increase the time students have for engaging in learning that builds conceptual understanding and develops analytical and application skills. The student workshops are delivered in English and Spanish to support all our learners. (Planning and Preparation, Engagement and Assessment) Target Audience: All core subject teachers will receive this training. Our ELA and ENL teachers will be present during the student workshops Proposed Dates: September 4, 2018- Whole- School Overview September 24, 2018- Close Reading Workshop October 29, 2018- Note-Taking Workshop November 14, 2018- Teacher Leader (train-the trainer model) workshop December 3, 2018- Time Management Workshop December 10-11, 2018- iLit ELL Curriculum Training January 28, 2019- Full Staff Professional Learning February 11, 2019- Student Elevation Workshop (Growth Mindset) March 6, 2019- Teacher Leader (train-the trainer model) workshop March 18, 2019- Memory Workshop April 15, 2019- Ace Your Exams Workshops Theme: Student Engagement Providers: Professional Learning Team, Principal & Assistant Principals Target Audience: Principal, Assistant Principal, ELA, ENL Teachers iLit ELL Curriculum Training: Our teachers will receive 2 days of professional training on how to deliver instruction using the various components of iLit ELL. Teachers will also learn how to utilize actionable data from iLit reports to track progress, measure growth, and get insights into learning that will inform instruction. Training will be provided by Pearson Consultants. Target Audience: Principal, Assistant Principal, All teachers of English Language Learners Professional Learning Book Study: Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain: Promoting Authentic Engagement and Rigor Among Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students by Zaretta Hammond Rationale: Based on our Advance reports, our school has a need for improving engagement of all students, including our English Language Learners. We believe if our teachers engage in a professional learning community anchored in Zaretta Hammond's work, our teachers will deepen their understanding how the intersection between neuroscience research and designing culturally responsive instruction. We chose the book because it includes the following: · relationships · become independent learners · studies&nbsp; Monday professional learning (4 sessions) starting October 23,- November 12, 2018 Theme: Assessment Target Audience: Teacher Teams October 2018- May 2019: · monitor&nbsp;instructional practices based upon teacher collaborations.&nbsp; Information on how one’s culture programs the brain to process data and affects learning Department teams&nbsp;will meet and engage in the Data analysis protocols to Ten "key moves" to build students’ learner operating systems and prepare them to Prompts for action and valuable self-reflection to drive our learning in lesson 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part C: Professional Development Department teams will meet and engage in the Data analysis protocols to monitor instructional practices based upon teacher collaborations. May/June 2018: Reflecting on the Year’s successes and planning for the year to come - revisiting the Theory of Action, curriculum review, NYSESLAT progress, Regents Preparation Planning and Targeted intervention strategies. Newsletters to inform parents&nbsp;of specific strategies students are learning Our school will implement implement advisory. One goal of the advisory program is to rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parental involvement at College Academy has consistently been increasing, though we are continuously seeking ways to get parents more involved. This academic year we have continued an initiative aimed at improving ELLs’ academic achievement, which involves working closely with their parents. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue with the following initiatives · across&nbsp;the school&nbsp; · have advisers&nbsp;meet with their advisees and their family at least once per semester to increase communication regarding student progress toward graduation requirements&nbsp; and to develop action plans to keep students on the path toward graduation.&nbsp;&nbsp; · Placement opportunities, and to teach parents ways to support their child’s academic success (school-wide strategies)&nbsp; Newsletters to inform parents of specific strategies students are learning across the school Our school will implement implement advisory. One goal of the advisory program is to have advisers meet with their advisees and their family at least once per semester to increase communication regarding student progress toward graduation requirements and to develop action plans to keep students on the path toward graduation. Parent workshops to inform parents about credit requirements, Advanced Placement opportunities, and to teach parents ways to support their child’s academic success (school-wide strategies) At the College Academy we believe that we are instrumental in assisting parents in developing a plan for their child to attend and pay for college. We will work in collaboration with our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, teachers, and school leaders to assist parents and families of English Language Learners begin discussions surrounding the cost of college, specific types of colleges, their academic programs, and various financial aid opportunities. In addition to monthly parent meetings, we will collaborate with the campus Student Success Center to host college fairs with a focus on programs geared to various career pathways. We will also continue to host several college trips over the course of the year to target to target English Language Learners. We want to plan trips to: Fordham University, Syracuse University, New Paltz Parent workshops to inform parents about credit requirements,&nbsp; Advanced 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities College, and City College. We will invite family members on these trips so that they have the opportunity to be active participants in their child’s college readiness experience. We will have bilingual staff members present who can support parents in asking questions. The first Monday of every month from 5-8pm, our Parent Coordinator facilitates a parent meeting in collaboration with the Principal, Guidance Counselors and ENL Teachers. During these meetings, parents have the opportunity to learn and ask questions about how to support their children emotionally and in their academic lives. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will conduct a survey in order to offer parents more flexible meeting times to participate in workshops, meetings, and other school functions Parents are notified for these activities by receiving a personal telephone call, IO classroom notifications, our monthly calendar of events, newsletter, school website, an invitation or flier sent home in both, English and Spanish, and monthly calendar of events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. NA NA NA Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name The College Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 459 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Timothy Sigerson Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Aurora Velez Teacher/Subject Area M. Rodriguez/ Science Teacher/Subject Area J. Castillo/ Math Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Wendy Poveda Coach N/A School Counselor Vilma Hurtado Parent Judy Antonini Parent Coordinator Renzo Aliaga Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 425 Total number of ELLs 224 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 52.71% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): English/Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 Tot # 1 0 0 5 0 0 6 Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. English/Spanish English Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2000 2017-2018 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess literacy skills our school uses teacher made baseline assessments the first week of school. Assessments mirror the NYSESLAT model and are used for teaching and targeted interventions. Teachers also use prior year NYSESLAT results, NYSITELL data, as well as 8 th grade ELA and/or Regents results. This data helped us organize student classes by levels in order to target needs. We are also using the New York State Multilingual Screener to support our identification of SIFE students. Starting in the 2018-2019 school year, we will use the Renaissance STAR assessment as a baseline to screen students in English and Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school has an instructional cabinet which looks at student data across departments in order to make instructional adjustments. We also have a Dual Language Team that meets to analyze student data using protocols. The LAP team meets once a month in order to guide instructional planning for our ELLS. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the ELLs by the following factors - credit accumulation, NYSESLAT scores, passing Regents exams, especially the ELA exam, PSAT and SAT scores, graduation rate and College and Career Readiness Index, MLS, Mock Regents Exams, and STAR assessement. Our ELL program was completely overhauled four years ago by replacing teachers and implementing various methodologies, such as using Regents based materials even with beginners and using a wide variety of vocabulary development strategies in order to better move the ELLs. The NYSESLAT data shows that our efforts are resulting in improvements as is the credit accumulation data. We are creating more targeted interventions for students in preparing them to pass the ELA Regents. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We will administer the baselines to determine response to intervention. We will then adjust the interventions based on the data. The ELL teacher team will meet every 6-12 weeks to analyze data and adjust intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The majority of newly enrolled students in our school are new to the country and tests as Entering on the NYSITELL,across all grades. An analysis of the NYSESLAT data shows us that there are more 9th grade Entering students than any other group and more Entering level students overall. The number of Entering/Emerging is higher in the 9th and 10th grades and the lower in the 11 th and 12th grade. Students perform best on the listening modalities. The reading and writing modalities present challenges for our students. We also analyze state ELA and Math scores for entering 9th grade to design targeted interventions for our students. Our (ELL Data Analysis Tool) EDAT revealed that 27.2% of our students are under credited. 39.3% students remained on the same proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. This data informed the creation of our Dual Language program and SIFE Bridges programs for our English Language Learners. - NYSESLAT -State ELA -State Math Exam -NYSITELL - MLS (Multilingual Screener) for SIFE Students -Regents (ELA, Alegebra, Living Environment, Earth Science, Global and US History) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL data is reviewed by our school team consisting of Guidance Counselors, Programmer, School Building Leaders, and Teachers. Based on the data, we determine adjust our programs. For example, we open additional classes within our Dual Language Programs, determine Saturday School programming and after-school classes necessary to support our students in strengthening their English language skills. Our ENL teachers have access to RLAT data (NYSESLAT and NYSITELL) as well as SIFE assessment data to support differentiation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  and target student needs. Because we have a large number of SIFE students, we are also increasing small group and one-on-one tutoring after school. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL classes are are graded and have highly qualified instructors. ENL students are programmed for stand alone ENL classes based on the hours needed as per their proficiency level, our Entering and Emerging students receive stand alone ENL classes. Students in our ENL programs often speak a home language that we cannot accommodate in our TBE or Dual Language classes. Students in all stand alone ENL classes are grouped based on their NYSESLAT levels on order to receive the required amount of ENL hours. The stand alone ENL classes are homogeneous, the proficiency level is the same in one class based on NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results. For special education students, there is a self-contained ENL class is heterogeneous (mixed levels) with an ENL and SPED teacher collaborating. Our students receive at least one period of integrated ELA in grades 9-12 five times per week in addition to their ENL stand alone period if applicable. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Bilingual Program content area classes are heterogeneous and graded depending on a students grade level and class requirements. Math, Science, and Social Studies are all available in home language (Spanish) taught by bilingual certified teachers. c. DL program. If applicable. We opened a Dual Language program for the 2017-2018 school year. The program is available for students in 9th and 10th grade. Students in our Dual Language classes are programmed for Home Language Arts and English Language Arts daily. One of the English Language Arts periods is an integrated ELA/ENL. Students at the Entering/Emerging level are receiving a stand alone ENL class per CR Part 154 as well. We have built in an additional period of Language Arts instruction. Students have one period designated for language instruction writing period daily, the language of instruction in the writing class alternates weekly. Our content area class (Math, Science, and Social Studies) are taught in English and Spanish (alternating day) by bilingual certified teachers. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL classes are programmed according to the NYS CR part 154 for instructional minutes. That is why it is necessary to program the ENL classes homogeneously. Administrators, guidance counselors, and a team of teachers come together with the additional support of our Field Support Center to create schedules that ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to five proficiency levels in the TBE and ENL program models. During a school day, (1) Entering ELLs receive 540 minutes (12 periods) of ENL per week, with at least 180 minutes being stand alone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and 180 minutes of either stand alone ENL or integrated ENL in content area, and 49 minutes of HLA per day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  (2) Emerging ELLs received 360 minutes of ENL per week, with at least 90 minutes per week in stand alone ENL, 180 minutes per week in integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes in either stand alone ENL or integrated ENL in content area, and 47 minutes of HLA per day. (3) Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL per week, with 90 minutes in either stand alone ENL or integrated ENL in content area, and 47 minutes of HLA per day. (4) Expanding ELLs received 180 minutes of ENL per week, with 180 minutes integrated ENL content area and English Language Arts (5 periods per week). (5) Commanding students receive 90 minutes (2 periods) of ENL per week of integrated ENL in ELA or a content area. In the Transitional Bilingual program, HLA instruction is delivered for 49 minutes per day/ five times per week. In the Dual Language program students also receive 49 minutes of instruction 5 times per week and one period for writing instruction which alternates based on the language of instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Transitional Bilingual program delivers core content instruction in Spanish and English. Since there is heterogeneous mix of students in the classes, the percentage of native language delivery is never greater than 50%. The Bilingual classes teach students English language as well as Home language proficiency through content with teachers adapting their instruction to ensure student comprehension. Teachers use content lessons to convey vocabulary and language structure in both languages. The subject area teachers include a variety of practices to support students such as the use of graphic organizers, brain storming, literature circles, interactive bulletin boards, vocabulary building, native language text books, visual representations, dual language presentations and translations. For the 2017-2018 school year, we will be embedding clear content and language objectives into our lessons, focusing on the hallmarks of Advanced Literacy (Engaging Texts, Rich Discussion, Daily Writing, High-Utility Vocabulary Words). Core content teachers use materials in Spanish from prior Regents exams, translated historical documents, and Spanish language textbooks. In the Freestanding ENL program students are taught their core subjects in English and receive ENL instruction. In collaboration with the HLA and ELA teachers, the ENL teachers deliver instruction anchored in key Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) such as determining central ideas, domain specific words, and write informative/explanatory texts that convey complex ideas and cite evidence from texts. ENL teachers use leveled libraries and differentiated readings based on students reading levels to engage students at their English reading level in rigorous materials. Our Dual Language program teachers plan closely together and teach the same genre, guided by the same essential questions to promote deep conceptual understandings in both languages. Our HLA teachers work with ENL, ELA, and bilingual teachers to make the content that they teach inter-disciplinary by focusing on the same literacy skill set that students need to be successful. The teachers focus on citing textual evidence and vocabulary development, including the use of cognates. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? New students are evaluated using the LAB-R. We administer a Multilingual Screener MLS to our SIFE students. ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their Home Language through ongoing common core skills and content area assessments throughout the year. Skills are tested with a baseline, 2 benchmarks assessments, and a summative assessment. Content skills are tested in formative and summative classroom assessments. All assessments in the Transitional Bilingual Program are given in Home Language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Students have access to technology to use translation applications and websites. Teachers provide bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. In our classrooms you will find station resource baskets which contain cognates word lists, dictionaries, and glossaries in the native language. As a resource, students are provided with instructional materials in the Native Language as an additional support. We also pair students with the same native language to support each other. We use an online student data system called Skedula. Information from assessments are entered in Skedula, teachers and school leaders can access the data and identify trends and patterns in the data to make adjust and revise the plans. In addition, most Regents exams are made available in their home language if they chose to take it in that language. Students are given ELL accommodations on tests such as extended time, separate location (if applicable) and bilingual glossaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are initially evaluated to determine both their language proficiency as well as their skill level. These findings help us determine the academic interventions necessary to supplement their classes. Within the classes, teachers differentiate based skill and language development data to provide multiple entry points for all students. Teachers use strategies such as scaffolding, using prior knowledge, inferring, graphic organizers, technology (video, Google Translate, Google Images), sequencing, vocabulary development, chucking, cause and effect, etc. We are also planning small-group and one-one tutoring sessions to provide our SIFE students with additional support to help them develop literacy skills. This school year we have partnered with CUNY and Fordham University to provide our students access to Bridges Curriculum designed to help students build basic literacy skills in a high school setting. b. ELLs in the country for less than three years will receive placement testing to determine specific ENL class levels as well as skill level assessments in both languages. The data will be used for programming programming and instructional decisions. The Newcomers program integrates language acquisition through rigorous academic activities as well as socio-emotional supports such as participation in the People's Theater project and city exploration through trips and projects. Students also use laptops for Google translate to understand the nuanced differences in their Native Language and English. c. ELLs who have received services for four to six years will be monitored to determine if their language acquisition is at the expected rate of progress. In order to properly instruct the students, a recommendation is made by the educators for further testing to determine if the delay in language acquisition is due to other factors. If the delay is skill based and not language based then these students will be targeted for Academic Intervention Services in all content areas. If the delay is based on language, then more exposure to the English language is built into the student's programs such as increasing instruction in English in the content areas classes as the year progresses. d. The plan for the long term ELLs is to conduct additional assessments to determine the reason they have not attained English Language proficiency. They will be tested in both languages to determine skill levels. In addition, we will provide intense ENL instruction in the summer and on Saturdays. The ENL instruction will be differentiated to focus on strengthening cognitive skills as well as linguistic abilities in both languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  The program created for ELLs-SWDs is an ICT model. Two teachers, one ENL licensed, the other Special Education licensed, co-teach. The class is separated into cooperative learning groups based on proficiency level and frequent assessments are given which drives instruction. Instructional strategies include previewing target text, teacher modeling of oral reading, oral reading prompts, visual spacial displays, text look back strategy, story mapping, text mapping, context clue skill training, and story retelling, rubric assessments, brainstorming, pre-writing, drafting, and revising. Instructional materials include leveled reading libraries, glossaries, use of technology, as well as using inter-disciplinary readings in the home language to re-inforce skills being taught in ENL classes. Technology includes use of Google translate, use of websites for scaffolded readings (NewsELA), and student-generated research products. In our content area classes, we continue to embed more hands-on learning opportunities to help students develop deep conceptual knowledge. We are also working closely with our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Department to build and strengthen our internship opportunities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with disabilities are provided with an additional period of AIS taught by bilingual or ENL certified Special Education teachers. Instruction focuses on language acquisition through content area instruction as well as skill building. We ensure flexible programming for our ELL-SWDs to maximize time spent with non-SWD peers by scheduling lunch, gym, and music classes inclusively. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas include: ENL as part of the Integrated Co-Teaching model, after-school programs, tutoring, regents prep, Newcomers program M-F, Saturday school supplemental support, summer intensive ENL programs for Newcomers, and summer intensive ELA prep for advanced ENL student, Bridges curriculum for Low Literacy SIFE students. ENL, HLA, and ELA teachers work together to lesson plan and adjust instruction to create consistency between classrooms and scaffolds students at their level. Targeted intervention for science and social studies includes adjusting the HLA curriculum to better support the literacy acquisition skills fo students. HLA teachers use non-fiction reading and writing assignments based on the content being taught in science and social studies and the skills being taught in ELA and ENL. All of our school's intervention services are offered in both English and Spanish. Our intervention programs are available for ELLs struggling to pass content classes and/or acquire English at the expected rate of progress. Our intervention services are analyzed based on data from content and Common Core aligned literacy skills assessments built into our school's assessment calendar. Students take baseline, benchmark and summative assessments. Teachers use common rubrics to grade assessments across classrooms. Data is then analyzed and teachers conduct a gap analysis to target specific content or literacy skills that students still struggle with. We also open the school during breaks to help students acquire credits towards graduation. This year our "March Madness" program offered credit intensives to support credit accumulation. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have opened our first Dual Language Program for the 2017-2018 school year. We considered this program because we believe it the program's potential to educate students in two languages and develop full biliteracy and bilingualism. This year we have a new program whereby HLA teachers will be mirroring the activities taught in ELA classes in Spanish so that students include more text evidence and resources to use as evidence on ELA Regents. We will also initiate Peer Helpers, a program where students with more advanced language proficiency support students with less proficiency . We are also matching Advanced Placement Biology students with students in the Living Environment classes in order support them in strengthening content knowledge in preparation for the regents. Content areas teachers will also incorporate aspects of translanguaging in order to improve literacy skills for the regents and college readiness. In addition to matching 9th and 10th grade students to our 11th and 12th grade students, each student will have a faculty member as a mentor. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All schools programs are open to ELLs and ELLs are invited to participate by having all announcements, posters, and activities translated. There is no program that excludes them. There is a Saturday ELL intensive program as well as a Regents Prep program. We also have a Newcomers Intensive after school program. After school tutoring with select teachers are also available. All clubs and sports teams are open to ELLs. We have a collaboration with the People's Theater Project that works with 30 Entering level ELLs to create a play in Spanish. We have also partnerned with EVC. EVC helps our students use language in authentic contexts, engaging our students in all aspects of the video documentary production process; screening and analyzing peer-produced media; conducting interviews in and out of school; and making decisions about the organization of their documentary. In addition to EVC and the People's Theater project, we have a gaming club, capoeira dance club, student government, Latin dance club, international club, Girl Talk, and a Pay-it-forward group. Every notification, announcement, and assembly program is translated. In curricular programs, ELLs participate in all core content classes and have electives that help boost their literacy skills and educational success. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Key instructional material which is used to support ELLs include SMART board, laptops with Google translate, websites such as ESLLibrary.com, EnglishforEveryone.com, TheLessonPlanet.com, NewsELA.com, PBSNewshour.com, Scholastic.com. We are also using Collections which has a Robust media literacy component. Students also receive content area textbooks and workbooks in native language and adapted versions of ELA books. Classrooms have leveled reading libraries. Teachers in all classrooms use visual video clips, kinesthetic cues, anchor charts throughout the classrooms, and graphic organizers to support ELLs. We are also looking to adopt school-wide instructional protocols for teaching key skills such as close-reading. Teachers have also began using Translanguaging strategies and using cognates in the classroom to assist in language acquisition. Teachers use kinesthetic modeling when possible and engage students in small group work with thoughtful grouping appropriate to the task. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support in Spanish is provided through a well planned TBE program. Classes begin the year with the teachers speaking 70% Spanish and increase English instruction as the year continues. Teachers use strategies such as writing on the board in both languages using two colors of marker, having non content vocabulary word walls in native language, identifying and clarifying misconceptions when words in the language have multiple meanings. Assessment and data driven instruction is planned collaboratively by HLA and bilingual teachers using teacher-created assessments. The HLA classes are programmed according to grade. Many qualified students take and pass the LOTE exam. Furthermore,the HLA curriculum is Common Core aligned. We set high expectations for all our students. As such, we offer AP Spanish Literature. For students in our Free Standing ENL classes that speak a language other than Spanish, we provide home language supports using technology. Students are able to translate texts and read in their native language. In addition for students with languages other than Spanish we use the Multilingual Screener (MLS) to determine students literacy levels in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. e ensure that all required services and resources correspond to our students' age and grade level by providing a common-core aligned curriculum and appropriate grade level texts. Teachers use leveled readings, differentiation strategies such as heterogeneous groupings, tiered-tasks, multiple entry points, and student choice in method of presentation of project assessments. The school evaluates the services and resources based on student assessment data such as the NYSESLAT scores. Through our programming, we make sure that ELLs get the correct number of minutes of ENL and HLA instruction. Materials. In our school, each grade level has an assigned guidance counselor. Because our school's guidance counselors work with cohorts, they understands individual student needs and establish a relationship with each students' family. Our Guidance Counselors, hold a Town Hall meeting each semester to keep students informed of their progress towards graduation as well as all the services available to assist them. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is co-located sharing the school building with three other schools. The four schools come together to share resources to support hiring staff and purchasing equipment to engage students in academics and extra-curricular activities. For example, the four schools collaborated to bring a music program to our school. Our schools collaborate on large events. For instance, we welcomed an author that shares a cultural background similar to our students to our campus. She shared her story and signed books for our students. In addition, our three schools shared resources to hire an Assistant Principal for Special Education to ensure that the needs of our English Language Learners with disabilities are met. The four schools collaborate to host open houses, provide classes for parents, and provide our students academic experiences such as Physics and AP calculus courses offered at other schools in the buildings to our students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly arrived ELLs who register in our school over the summer participate in the annual freshman orientation. Orientation is for students and their parents and is provided in their home language. We also encourage the students to enroll in our intensive ENL class during the summer and to take advantage of summer programs offered by the NYCDOE for English Language Learners. Students who enroll during the school year receive orientation from the school staff including the APS, APA, Parent Coordinator, guidance counselor, ENL teacher and other staff. Our guidance counselors continue to monitor students' process of adjustment to the school and the country. Classroom teachers are the key to observing the students as they acclimate, and the Newcomers program helps them adapt to school culture with the support of their peers. Teachers offer tips such as use of local libraries for Internet access and guidance counselors recommend neighborhood and community assistance programs for parents such as ESL classes offered at library or through community based organizations. Teachers, guidance, and support staff are constantly monitoring our students and keeping parents informed. Essentially, the entire educational community takes part in assisting the 9th grade students to transition from middle school to high school. Incoming freshman attend an orientation over the summer where they are given a tour of the school and academic requirements are explained to them. They also get to meet their guidance counselors, administrators, and many of their teachers. 9th grade teachers and guidance counselors meet during common planning to train, discuss, review data and create various strategies and structures to support transitioning ELLs. Multiple times during the year, 9th grade Town Meetings are held to inform, inspire and support the transition to high school, reward students for accomplishments, and remind students of high school graduation requirements. Prizes and awards are given out for attendance, grades, and other achievements. Every Friday 9th graders celebrate Spirit day with the rest of the school in wearing their school tee shirts. The guidance counselors also receive professional development on assisting ELLs in their transition from middle school to high school from internal administrators and they plan to ease the transition through after school clubs and activities that support Newcomers, as well as parent involvement through parent associated meetings and annual parent orientations in Spanish. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer AP Spanish classes. We also offer the City Ventures elective which teaches students about New York City and includes trips to many of the cultural institutions in New York City. We also partnered with Educational Video Company EVC to provide our students with a video documentary class. These classes are designed to help students build their language skills using a variety of media to write and produce a documentary. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  a) We opened a Dual Language program in the fall of 2017. The model is a side by side for Language Arts (English Language Arts and Home Language Arts) Students will receive ELA and HLA instruction daily. b) Bilingual certified content area teachers (Math, Science, and Social Studies) will teach following an A/B schedule. One day Spanish, one day English until it a 50/50 balance is achieved over 10 days. c) HLA (Spanish) daily, ELA (English) daily, Science (English/Spanish) alternating, Science (English/Spanish) alternating, Social Studies (English/Spanish) alternating. d) both languages taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our Professional Development plan for the year is centered around our instructional focus. Based on data assessment we will engage on a whole school effort to have our students show growth in literacy through reading comprehension, vocabulary, and the ability to demonstrate content knowledge through writing across curricula. To help us meet meet our instructional goals we will engage teachers of ELLS in the following professional learning sessions/series Advanced Literacy Instruction (DELLS) Dual Language Series (DELLS) SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) study group All teachers are involved since every teacher is a teacher of ELL or former ELL students. Teachers get 45 minutes of Professional learning two Mondays per month. Monday Professional learning, as well as other PL days (such as Election Day, January 29 , and June Chancellor's Conference Day) are teacher centered based on the needs of teachers and students. There is a focus on collaboration, inter-disciplinary curriculum revision, inter-visitation, student engagement and feedback. There is also ELL specific PD opportunities from DELLS/BFSC for teachers, school counselors, and related service providers. Our PD plan is centered around teacher inter-visitations to share best practices in increasing student achievement through the implementation of promising practices, literacy strategies, and Common Core implementation. Teachers participate in cycles of intervistation and feedback and then share with the staff each Monday. This is supplemented by professional development from administrators that teach or highlight specific strategies, turn-key of PDs that individual teachers participate in (such as trans-languaging, bringing more literacy into content area bilingual classes, use of cognates), and outside representatives such as RSE-TASC. We will also incorporate team building activities meant to help teachers work collaboratively on consultancies during Common Planning. These activities support teachers in delivering Common Core aligned instruction by allowing teachers to share strategies and best practices, curriculum plan, share grading rubrics, and collectively grade student work so that there is a common definition of proficiency across classrooms. Teachers use protocols to share their lesson plans, obtain feedback from their colleagues, and implements, analyze and revise strategies used to target academic language and content acquisition for ELLs. School vision, Introductions and expectations – College Access for All. Skedula training review to set up marking periods, review entering parent contact logs, review creating assignments for data stream.(1.1, 1.2, 4.2) September 5 & 6– SESIS Training and 408 Compliance - Identifying Students with needs (ELL, SPED, Lowest third).(1.2, 1.4, 3.1) Monday 9/11/17 Getting Started with Collections Language Arts Teachers learned how to use the Collections digital platform. They also learned about resources to support all 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  learners. October- 2016 – Facilitators: Principal, ELA Teacher and ESL Teacher. Monday 10/2/17 Announcements, Introduce 3 major themes (Planning, Engagement, Assessment) Provide teachers with an overview of three major topics for professional development for the 2017-2018 school year. 3.1 4e Friday 10/13/17 Monday 10/16/17 Collect data on professional development needs and areas of expertise to strengthen collaboration and build instructional capacity. Inter-visitation initiative to enhance teaching and improve student achievement; to establish protocols and practice taking low inference notes with a focus on increasing teacher collaboration and trust (October 16) 4E Introduction to SIOP Professional Article (SIOP) Introduce teachers to the SIOP model through a professional text in preparation for full day PD November 2016- · Facilitators: Pearson Consultant (SIOP), Principal, Assistant Principal, Science Teacher, 2 ELA Teachers (1E) Monday 11/6/17 Introduction to SIOP Professional Article (SIOP) Sample Lesson Plan- Video Introduce teachers to the SIOP model through a professional text in preparation for full day PD 1.2 1a, 1e Tues 11/7/17 SIOP Pearson Day 1 (Full Day) Explain eight factors that affect second-language acquisition. Identify the components and features of the SIOP Model. Observe and practice each of the eight components. Incorporate the SIOP Model into lesson planning. Build/modify a lesson using the SIOP Model features and components. 1.2 1a, 1e Monday 11/20/17 Learning walks/inter visitation evidence of SIOP in practice and the impact on student learning Strategies for Student Engagement Marzano (The Highly Engaged Classroom) 1.1 1.2 2.2 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c Tues 11/20/17 Department Meeting (Professional Learning Community) Focus: Collaborative Learning/Co-Teaching 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Teachers meet with their departments to analyze student work and determine implications for instruction. 4.2 1a, 1e, 3d November 28 & 29 - Share out of Local Effective Practices (aligning teacher’s professional responsibilities with the school’s instructional goals...with teachers involved in the decision making process) (2.2, 3.4, 3.2) December 2016- Facilitator: Principal, Assitant Principals, Teacher Leaders Monday 12/4/17 Learning walks/intervisitation evidence of SIOP in practice and the impact on student learning Strategies for Student Engagement Marzano (The Highly Engaged Classroom) 1.1 1.2 2.2 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c Tues 12/5/17 Learning walks/intervisitation evidence of SIOP in practice and the impact on student learning Department Meeting (Professional Learning Community) Teachers meet with their departments to analyze student work and determine implications for instruction. 4.2 1a, 1e, 3d Monday 12/18/17 Assessment (Checks for Understanding and feedback to students) Teachers will learn different methods to check for understanding at different points in the lesson and to provide specific, actionable feedback to students. 2.2 3.1 3d Tues 12/19/17 Department Meeting (Professional Learning Community) Teachers meet with their departments to analyze student work and determine implications for instruction. 4.2 1a, 1e, 3d January 2018: 1/29/2018 SIOP Day 3 Teaching Study Skills Series: Elevate Education 10/19, 11/13, 1/8, 4/16 February 2018: Assessment: Student work analysis,Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport (2A), Managing Student Behavior (2D), Growing and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Developing Professionally (4E). March 2018: Engagement : Implementing differentiation in written lesson plans. Differentiation Part 2: How to differentiate skills for special populations (ELLs, SWD, students in need of Tier 2 supports). Collaboration: Using consultancies and inter-visitations to enhance pedagogy (4E) April 2018: Assessment: Planning for the upcoming Common Core Skills Summative Assessment #1 – How to create and analyze assessments for progress and gaps, creating plans for targeted re-teaching. Literacy Strategy Consultancy and targeted interventions part 1, Interventions for ELLs within content areas. May/June 2018: Reflecting on the Year’s successes and planning for the year to come - revisiting the Theory of Action, curriculum review, NYSESLAT progress, Regents Preparation Planning and Targeted intervention strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the required 15% of ELL-specific professional development for all teachers and 50% for ENL and Bilingual teachers we have aligned our professional learning activities to our instructional focus of building academic language skills for all of our students. Our school is comprised of nearly 50% English Language Learners as such the majority of our professional learning sessions are geared toward helping teachers enhance their pedagogical practices for English Language Learners. At the start of the school year, we asked teachers to complete a professional development survey to help us understands the areas they identified as priorities for professional learning. Many of the sessions are full day and facilitated by a consultant. Our Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) professional learning will consist of three days of training. We maintain agendas, archive presentations, and turn-key information when necessary. In addition to the professional learning sessions, department meetings are dedicated to analyzing student work and exploring promising practices for ELL students. PD is focused on sharing best practices on literacy skills, which is integral to ELL student achievement. Bilingual, ENL and HLA teachers receive specific professional development through differentiation by being in a small group with ELL population as target focus. Records of the attendance and agendas for these weekly meetings are maintained in a binder in the Principal's office. Additionally teachers meet 3 times a week in departmental Common Planning where they collaboratively conduct gap analysis on student work and consultancies on their pedagogy. Records of the attendance as well as teacher created artifacts showing their weekly work in analyzing student assessments is reviewed by department APs and maintained in binders in the Principal's office. Additionally, ENL teachers attend PD outside of school offered through DELLS, as appropriate and turn-key information to the departments through. Records of additional PD are maintained in our PD binder in Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our plan for the 2017-2018 school year is to send a mid-year progress report to communicate to parents current language proficiency and progress toward meeting school wide goals for attendance, credit accumulation, and Regents. We will work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  collaboratively with parents to identify supports and interventions to help students stay on track to meet their goals. In addition to progress reports, we will meet with parents for their annual meeting. In the event that a parent cannot attend we will engage the parents and families through conference calls and follow up with a written document containing a summary of the information and next steps discussed during the conference. The first Monday of each month we hold a parent meeting, with a focus on ELLs to discuss the goals of each program and progress of ELL students. We provide information about Regents and Advanced Regents diploma requirements to keep parents informed. We also host monthly workshops for parents to provide them with information on topics ranging for (relationship abuse, college level courses, and Advanced Placement classes).Translation is provided by our staff. Language proficiency assessment results are sent out in mid September by mail to each parent. All parent meetings and letters are translated into Spanish through by a member of our staff. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and provides our parents with information consistently. All parental contact is logged digitally and copies of parent meeting attendance and agendas are kept in the Principal's office. Any lower incidence language translation services are done through DOE translation and interpretation unit services (planned at least two weeks ahead of time). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The College Academy continues to work on building strong relationships with families. Our teachers and guidance counselors regularly meet and communicate with parents to keep them informed about their child's progress. Based on feedback from our ELL parents and families, we have the following activities planned for the 2017-2018 school year. Month Newsletter AP / Teachers Workshop Parent Meeting October PA Member AP of Organization Introduction Rachel Gregory Justin Melis and supports offered by Relationship Abuse Prevention Program Meeting Overview School Policy & Safety / Title 1 Meeting Student Reading Poetry November PA Member Guidance Counselors Principal Focus on Academics- Grading Policies and Academic Supports for English Language Learners Naviance Family Connection Learn how Naviance Family Connection is used as a tool to align student's strengths and interest to post-secondary goals, and develop individualized plans for reaching them. This interactive workshop will provide an overview of the Naviance platform and teach parents how to access their accounts and view the range of college and career possibilities available to students. Celebration top 5 students Attendance/ 10th 11th 12th Top Regent Grades All incoming 9th Grade Regent Grades December PA Member 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  AP of Language Arts Dept and Special Education Destination College: This workshop will help parents and students understand the financial process. It will focus on defining financial aid and how it is determined, conducting scholarship searches and managing student educational debt. Recommended for parents of middle and high school students. Followup: FAFSA Help Day at the Fordham Rose Hill Campus 12-2-17. Teen dating/ violence Supporting all Parents Come and learn helpful information about navigating the school system including how to communicate with school staff, tips regarding excused absences, and strategies on how to deal with and report bullying. January PA Member Guidance Counselors Principal Stress Management Secrets of the Stressed-Out Brain: What Really Happens in There and What You Can Do To Conquer Stress! Regents Exam Mid-Year Progress Reports February PA Member AP Guidance Counselors Positive Communication Is it difficult to interact with your child? During this workshop, you will learn strategies to strengthen family communication, explore techniques to understand verbal cues, and establish age appropriate expectations for behavior and consequences Top 5 student of each grade (1st Semester) / Parent Survey March PA Member AP Principal Guidance Counselor Sexual Abuse Awareness (RAPP) PA Election Date Notice to Principal (April 1st Deadline) / Parent Survey April PA Member AP Principal Guidance Counselor Growth Mindset A child's "I Can Quotient" includes the qualities that predict a child's ability to thrive in life. Learn strategies to increase your child's sense of feeling connected, capable, competent, and courageous. Formation of Nominating Committee May 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  PA Member AP Principal Guidance Counselor Test Preparation- What exams will my child be taking, what does it measure? What supports should my child have for each test? PA Elections June PA Member AP Principal Guidance Counselor End of Year Celebration Summer Academy Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Timothy Sigerson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The College Academy School DBN: 06M462 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Timothy Sigerson Title Principal Wendy Poveda Assistant Principal Renzo Aliaga Aurora Velez Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Judy Antonini Parent M. Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area J. Castillo Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Vilma Hurtado School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Yuet Chu N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Manhattan Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 07/19/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M462 School Name: The College Academy Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Renzo Aliaga Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The methodologies we use in our school to assess language preference of the parent community for both written and oral communication are the following: First, a trained Pedagogue, who is bilingual (English/Spanish), provides all newly admitted students with a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). The HLIS is available in nine different languages. The parent complete this survey with the support of our trained pedagogue who reads each question to the parent and answers any questions they may have before they provide a final answer. Based on the answers provided by the parent or guardian, identifies the language of preference for parents and informs the Parent Coordinator who then, conducts an informal oral interview with the parent and shares our process for oral and written communication in their language. We also use ATS to identify the language preferences of families in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  our school. Our school secretary prints the Adult Preferred Language Report (RALP) to identify the percentage of parents who prefer written and oral information given to them in Spanish or any other language. In addition, we use the Emergency Contact cards as a resource to provide parents with information in their preferred language. For this reason, all letters and other documents distributed to parents are made available in the home languages represented in our student population. Furthermore, the Parent Coordinator, creates and maintains a report that we update regularly with the languages that parents speak by class and by grade. Finally, our staff collaborates in scheduling orientations sessions as needed for our families in their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French MOSSI (AKA MORE) English Spanish 3 5 1 129 526 0.45 0.75 0.15 19.43 79.22 3 5 1 129 526 0.45 0.75 0.15 19.43 79.22 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September- October How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use in house bilingual personnel to translate into Spanish all written correspondence. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Student handbook, Parent Conference Information Curriculum Night ENL Eligibility School Calendar Monthly September- June All written translation is done by our Spanish speaking Parent Coordinator and other in house staff. All oral communication via phone messenger is sent in both English and Spanish. We use IO Classroom which has translation services embedded for all of our parents in most languages. New features allow teachers to communicate with parents through built-in translation tools. In addition, we will utilize the DOE approved vendors for translation of low-incidence languages. We use in house bilingual personnel to translate into Spanish all written correspondence. All written translation is done by our Spanish speaking Parent Coordinator and other in house staff. All oral communication via phone messenger is sent in both English and Spanish. We use IO Classroom which has translation services embedded for all of our parents in most languages. New features allow teachers to communicate with parents through built-in translation tools. In addition, we will utilize the DOE approved vendors for translation of low-incidence languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Testing Announcements October, November, January, April, May After School and Saturday School tutoring, Curriculum Night, Graduation Information, Parent Association Meetings, Parent Workshops, School Activities, Announcements Monthly Updates September- June We use in house bilingual personnel to translate into Spanish all written correspondence. All written translation is done by our Spanish speaking Parent Coordinator and other in house staff. All oral communication via phone messenger is sent in both English and Spanish. We use IO Classroom which has translation services embedded for all of our parents in most languages. New features allow teachers to communicate with parents through built-in translation tools. In addition, we will utilize the DOE approved vendors for translation of low-incidence languages. We use in house bilingual personnel to translate into Spanish all written correspondence. All written translation is done by our Spanish speaking Parent Coordinator and other in house staff. All oral communication via phone messenger is sent in both English and Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  We use IO Classroom which has translation services embedded for all of our parents in most languages. New features allow teachers to communicate with parents through built-in translation tools. In addition, we will utilize the DOE approved vendors for translation of low-incidence languages. Our Parent Coordinator works to ensure that that signage is posted including a multilingual welcome poster. We also distribute a flyer to families to let them know of the resources available through the Translation and Interpretation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 9th Grade/ New Student Orientation interpretation service(s)? In-house Bilingual Personnel to translate all oral communication We will provide language assistance for languages that our staff does not speak by requesting translation services from the translation and interpretation unit. August We plan on using funding to secure a DOE approved vendor to provide translation and interpretation services to meet the needs of our low-incidence language speakers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  Open School Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November, March School Leadership Team September-June Parent Association Meeting September- June Academy Awards Night Graduation June June All staff will be informed of translation and interpretation resources so that they can communicate with families using the language line so that all staff can submit translation requests to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In-house Bilingual Personnel to translate all oral communication All staff will be informed of translation and interpretation resources so that they can communicate with families using the language line so that all staff can submit translation requests to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Bilingual Personnel translates for parents Bilingual Parent Coordinator and School personnel translate School Personnel/ Translation Services DOE Translation Services (Headsets for parents) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, families of all languages will be reached via phone messenger which will communicate in English and Spanish. We also have staff members in the George Washington Educational Campus that speak languages such as Arabic that can support translations for emergency situations. Our school also makes use of the Department of Education's Phone Interpretation Services that can help us translate in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the various resources for communicating with parents in their home language. Our Principal and Assistant Principal introduce our Parent Coordinator/ Language Access Coordinator through an in person announcement. As part of our Skedula professional development we will explore many of the translation features which support increased parent communication and participation. We also share the translation interpretation unit phone number to support staff outreach to families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As part of our Language Access Kit, we have received translated signage which says I Speak. The small cards are available in the Parent Welcome Center to ensure that we can make arrangements to speak in the family's preferred language. Our parent liaison uses translated Department of Education materials provided by the DOE and available in the main office. We make use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet website. We also translate all flyers and notification regarding parent engagement events at the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We review parent surveys which are available on the intranet page for the Translation and Interpretation unit. If we cannot obtain translation we can conduct surveys orally based on home language to determine whether or not we have met their language translation needs. We have small parent focus groups during PA meetings to gather feedback and best practice on how to continually meet the translation needs of parents inclusive of all languages and cultures. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89 
