2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M467 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR LAW AND PUBLIC SERVICE Principal: NICHOLAS POLITIS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Law and Public Service 06M467 310600011467 9-12 School Number (DBN): 549 Audubon Avenue New York, N.Y. 10040 212-342-6130 ext. 4141 Phone Number: 212-781-9516 Fax: Maria Alonso Malonso4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nicholas Politis Nicholas Bacon FlorReynoso MariantheSerelis Martha Rivera TianaChapman Jaclyn McCarthy N/A District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway New York, N.Y. 10040 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue New York, N.Y. 10001 8 th Floor YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nicholas Politis Nicholas Bacon FlorReynoso Oneida Bonet Martha Rivera TianaChapman Jaclyn McCarthy N/A MariantheSerelis MercedesSantos DeyaniraCorcino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Guidance Counselor Teacher Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  RafaelinaTineo Jose Almonte Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At the High School for Law and Public Service, we stand for PARTICIPATION: We believe that education is not a solitary event; therefore both students and teachers must be active learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT: Our school community strives for excellence through a rigorous, innovative, student-centered curriculum. Students develop analytical skills to become critical and independent thinkers and lifelong learners. COMMUNITY: We are dedicated to providing the members of our learning community with a nurturing and safe environment, wherein mutual respect and cultural diversity is honored. TEAMWORK: Administrators, teachers, parents and caregivers work together to develop mature, mindful and responsible individuals. SERVICE: We value learning that occurs beyond the classroom, therefore, we provide students with opportunities to become invested in their communities through service learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our 9-12 school serves an ethnically diverse population, with 83.6%Hispanic population, either new immigrants or first generation Americans from Central, South America, 2.1% non-Latino Caucasian and 13.1% Black. The student population is heterogeneously grouped within each grade and supported by a pedagogical staff of 34 teachers. High School of Law and Public Service offers an extended day program and after school activities.  3-Year Law Curriculum Sequence We provide a 3-year Law course sequence, working towards CTE status in Law Safety Cluster program. Our program is not limited to coursework. We have installed a mock courtroom in one classroom, we have a mock trial team, run moot court cases, invite speakers from the legal field, and students act as jurors for the NYU Law School final exams.  Expanded Success Initiative Our school is one of forty high schools selected to receive the Expanded Success Initiative (ESI) grant over a period of 4 years. The goal of the grant is to support black and Latino males become college and career ready. Presently, in our 4rd year of grant administration, we are implementing a number of programs and initiatives aimed at addressing academic achievement, youth development and school culture features which impact the success of these young men. We evaluate and ensure success of our grant related programs by:  Creating a plan each year aligned with the tenets of ESI and focusing on the college and career readiness of black and Latino boys,  Collecting data to evaluate the impact of our programs and initiatives,  Involving as many staff members from a broad spectrum of departments in order to assure impact on our school culture as a whole,  Meet as a planning team once per month to analyze relevant data, review initiative progress, and discuss additional program features  Discuss and plan for program, sustainability beyond the years of the grant award. 2018-19 CEP 10  ESI programs currently include: 1. Summer Bridge for incoming freshmen 2. Core Pathways theme-based advisory for freshmen 3. CCLS curriculum resources: Springboard Math, Achieve 3000 differentiated literacy program 4. Peer mentoring program for males 5. College visits for all grades, all students 6. School Culture and Communicating Vision - Calendar, Newsletter, Marketing  Saturday School and Extended Day Opportunities are provided for extended instruction, including 3-4 hours on Saturdays where core curriculum is supported by additional activities and materials as well as tutoring. Last year, we supported the 3 target populations with an average attendance of 150 students (25% of our student population). In addition, 75% of our student body is registered for 9 periods per day, resulting in an extended day of a full academic program.  4 Year Art and Drama Sequence Our theater class performs for the student body and the public twice annually. We support a 4 year visual art sequence including studio art, graphic arts, and art history which leads to the New York State comprehensive Art Exam. Our school is linked with College Now College courses of CUNY, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, the NYC Board of Education’s Law and Justice Resource Center, the New York City Police Department, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office and other justice-related institutions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have 2 primary target populations for specific inquiry: Lowest third in achievement including SWD Bilingual students including SWD The specific needs of the target populations are credit accumulation and passing Regents examinations. We have the following academic interventions: The Academic Intervention Services are numerous. All incoming ninth and tenth graders have a double English Language Arts class. Tenth graders will have a double period Algebra class. Our school has in place After School Tutoring, Homework Helpers, Saturday classes and faculty lunch tutoring. Every student in our school has an Individual Student Support Plan as Individual Counseling and Guidance is given to the students. Paraprofessionals make after school home contacts made every day. Other interventions include an on-site clinic where immediate referrals can be made as necessary. Monthly parental workshops and conferences are held to involve parents with their children’s education. The individual meetings take place in the spring for 9 th , 10 th and 11 th grade students to discuss their academic program for the following year with emphasis on meeting the student’s individual needs (regent’s prep, AP classes). Seniors have individual meetings with their counselor in September and February to discuss their personal graduation needs, college requirement, goals and are the referred to the college adviser. 2018-19 CEP 11  Opportunities are provided for extended instruction, including 3-4 hours on Saturdays where core curriculum is supported by additional activities and materials as well as tutoring. We supported the 2 target populations with an average attendance of 205 students (39% of our student population). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress with the following elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-community Ties and Trust Our key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school years are: Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers HSLPS has several structures for teachers teams, such as: 1. School Culture Teacher Teams 2. Pedagogical Professional Learning Communities 3. Subject Area Curriculum Teams 4. Grade Teams The pedagogical Professional Learning Communities and Subject Area Curriculum Teams directly address implementation of Common Core Standards. Each team utilizes data collected from their classrooms such as student participation, disciplinary actions, completed homework, increase in overall scholarship. Etc.) drive discussion and plans. These teams are led by a combination of administrators and teachers and are collaborative in the production of curriculum, presentations, initiatives and school activities. For the 2018-2019 academic school year we will focus on the following: 1. Prioritizing formative assessment in all academic subject areas. The development of common assessments across subject areas and the ability for students to attend extended day and Saturday School activities to enhance success on these assessments. 2. Provide students with multiple opportunities for improvement by expanded learning; establishing an after-school tutoring program. The development of a Saturday School program for our ENL population ti increase their success in literacy and mathematics. 3. Analyzing our Advance teacher evaluations focusing on providing effective timely feedback to our teachers using Danielson's components to promote teacher development and improve achievement fo all students, including SWD and ENL students. 2018-19 CEP 12  Rigorous instruction: Successful classroom requires a strong curriculum aligned to the Common Core that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged with their craft. The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades. This will be a focus and goal for our school for 2018-2019 Collaborative Teachers: High quality instruction is the strongest influence on student achievement. One of our goals will to help teachers acquire skills and expertise by providing opportunities for them to develop, grow, and learn from peers and experts. Through the creation of grade teams, teachers will analyze students and student data which will impact on planning and preparation for instruction. Teachers must be committed to student success and driven to improve their schools. Strong teachers innovate and hone their practice through continuous learning and frequent professional development. We will focus on peer collaboration and collective responsibility to create a professional community amongst our teachers as a goal during 2018-2019 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M467 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 544 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 81 79 5 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 68 61 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 87.5% % Reduced Lunch 37.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 83.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 19.09 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 77% 74% 70.9% 2.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES YES No N/A 64 62 8 83.5% 1.3% 23.7% 13.8% 0.7% 0.2% 14 29% 7.7 N/A N/A 83% 71% 75.1% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a needs assessment of our school’s academic program, it was determined that based on our 2016-2017 Quality Review indicator 1.2, we need to further develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson's: Framework for Teaching , aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Our 2017-2018 NYSED data indicates that our 75% of our students at the proficiency levels in the ELA, Algebra, Global History, United History, Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry and Physics Regents examinations as the data shows only 45% proficiency of our SWD and ENL students on the Regents examinations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To develop school-wide strategies that will enhance our instructional program leading to rigorous instructional program leading to rigorous instruction, high student engagement leading to an increase third year student credit accumulation from 54% to 57% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will participate in professional development activities that shift their teaching practice.    In all subject areas, monthly Professional Development activities will focus on Reading and Writing skills across subject areas to target student mastery of the Common Core standards. Using EngageNY resources to support professional development. In mathematics, Professional Development activities will focus on the six instructional shifts; "focus, coherence, fluency, deep understanding, application and dual intensity" demanded by the Common Core standards that will in turn lead to student mastery. Utilizing EngageNy resources to support teachers. Differentiated professional development for ELL and SWD populations. In all subject areas, monthly Professional Development activities will focus on the instructional shifts differentiated for our ENL students and students with disabilities, it will be evaluated on a bi-monthly basis analyzing our student scholarship and analyzing our cycles of observations including teacher inter-visitations and  walkthroughs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals & Principal Teachers Sept 2018- Assistant Principal & Principal June 2019  Conduct monthly parental workshops about specific Parents subject area information regarding rigorous instruction and common core parent activities that can be used to assist their child, including ELL and SWD. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal & Selected Subject Area Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 16  The Assistant Principals will offer monthly curricula nights, parents will learn about the curricula in each academic area and how what resources are available for them to assist their children with academic work. Assistant principals and subject area teachers will present information to our parents regarding curricula and what rigorous classroom instruction looks like in the classrooms, during monthly parent meetings in 2018-2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school has been programmed to have a common planning period for teachers to meet in grade teams, to participate in professional development conferences, and conference with students. Seven instructional leads have been selected to use Engage NY resources and supports to develop our school's professional development activities based on our needs from analyzing data and teacher observations. All professional development activities will be executed during this time on a weekly or bi-weekly basis. Assistant Principals and teachers are also sent to professional development activities outside school. Per-session for after-school tutoring and Saturday School. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 80% of teachers will evaluate their students with 2 common subject area assessments to develop a gap analysis to refine the curricula as student scholarship increases from 80% to 83%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Gap Analysis for each subject area and January 2019 Regents outcomes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, our credit accumulation for our third year students is below the city average. Our 2017-2018 NYS Report Card shows that the graduation rate (73%) is below the state standard of 80% for our student population including ELL and SWD. On our Quality Review 1.2 was an area of focus. The school's strength relative to this Framework is that there was an increase of 5% in the credit accumulation for our third year students from the 2017-2018 academic school year according to our School Quality Snapshots. Also, the graduation rate increased by 8%. The priority need that will be addressed is to academically intervene with our target population, bilingual students, which are th most needy and use our resources to have them succeed. There will be Regents review classes during the regular day school day. After-school tutoring, Saturday school and professional development activities geared towards differentiated instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of the graduation rate from 73% to 80%, by the establishment of a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers by having differentiated instruction within each classroom to meet the needs of our ELL and SWD student population. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?    development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In all subject areas, monthly Professional Development activities will focus on Reading and Writing skills across subject areas to target student mastery of the Common Core standards. Using EngageNY resources to support professional development. In mathematics, Professional Development activities will focus on the six instructional shifts; "focus, coherence, fluency, deep understanding, application and dual intensity" demanded by the Common Core standards that will in turn lead to student mastery. Utilizing EngageNy resources to support teachers. Students, Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Attendance office staff, guidance counselors  Conduct monthly parental workshops about specific subject area information regarding rigorous instruction and common core parent activities that can be used to assist their child. Students, Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Attendance staff, guidance staff, assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 - June 2019 the parent coordinator will work with the guidance staff to inform parents through mailings (translated for bilingual students) the priorities and expectations of each academic subject area and the graduation requirements including the requirements to get promoted from one grade to the next. Guidance counselors and assistant principals will present will develop information for parents regarding the support and resources available to our students and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel staff in attendance office, guidance counselors, family workers for home visits including per-session for guidance counselor workshops with parents on graduation requirements. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, scholarship will increase from 79% to 82%. Midpoint benchmark will be 80% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the STARS student scholarship reports to measure student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2016-2017 Quality Review and 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicator 4.2 we need to further develop teacher collaboration and grade teacher teams where teachers will be engaged in professional collaborations that analyze assessment data and improve teacher practice. Use EngageNy resources and Advance resources to professionally develop teachers to shift their instruction. Teachers use the common planning period to plan their lessons with a focus on increasing our ENL population's success regarding their Literacy and Mathematics achievement and the SWD population. Data trend: Teacher teams: developing 2016-2017 School Quality Report Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the advance score of component 3b will increase from 3.34 to 3.60 through monthly professional development activities. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue the improvement of teacher planning and executing high quality student centered, rigorous, differentiated, common core aligned lessons that are reflective of a coherent set of beliefs on the way each individual student learns best. Grade teams will focus on how student progress will lead to changes to teacher practice that could support students progress. Monday sessions of professional development for teachers to improve teacher practice in the areas of: designing coherent instruction, strategic differentiation, use of entry points into a lesson, use of formative assessment, effective questioning, accountable talk, student-centered instruction and project-based learning, using EngageNy resources and supports. Teachers will participate in inter-visitations, learning walks, to share and enhance instruction using the NYC Inter-visitation guide. Teachers will participate in monthly workshops during PD Mondays to differentiated curricula planning and instruction for our ENL students and students with disabilities using EngageNy resources and supports. Monthly parent workshops on parent-student- teacher Skedula grading and student achievement information system where all constituents will have access to student assignments, student grades and teacher anecdotal to parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers Oct. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal Parents Nov. 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principals, Principals, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents will receive access to Skedula/Pupilpath having constant communication with their child's teacher and progress. By Febraury 2019. 95% of teachers will have communicated with the parents through Skedula. The parent coordinator, guidance counselors, assistant principals will assist parents during monthly parent meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Assistant Principals and teachers collaborate on receiving professional development on Achieve 3000 and Skedula/Pupilpath during common planning time and at monthly parent meetings. Teachers will have monthly professional development sessions during common planning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 80% of teachers will implement the learned professional development activities through Design for Learning guidelines for differentiation when designing coherent instruction as evidenced by evaluation of components 3b of Danielson's Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Advance Observation system to monitor teacher evaluation for Component 3b, midyear assessment of component 3b should be 3.0. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As indicated in our 2016-2017 Quality Review , we will develop an in-house professional development team of lead PD teachers to explore strategies related to the instructional foci by reading articles/books, sharing best practices, researching the internet or attending outside PD workshops.  Lead teachers will turn-key activities as a team on PS Monday Sessions. 2016-2017 Quality Review Indicator for Professional Development: Developing Our professional development plan for 2018-2019 focuses on 1. Teachers will use writing strategies across all subject areas to check students’ comprehension and deepen their understanding of content by: Increasing vocabulary  Teaching sentence expansion techniques   Assessing ideas expressed in student writing  Providing feedback to support learning and revision 2. Teachers increasing opportunities for student-to- student interaction  increasing the frequency of student-centered discussion  employing flexible grouping strategies  giving students access to tools and technologies that foster collaboration (e.g., Google Docs, Google Classroom) 3. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review indicated a lack of teacher teams, Therefore, we will develop teacher teams to develop strategies for common assessments, looking at student work and developing a student portfolio in every classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 24  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The establishment of coherent teacher teams and professional development activities will have by June 2019, 85% of teachers receive an overall MOTP rating of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3b, as measured by Advance 2019 end of year MOTP rating in 3b. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-weekly school-wide Professional Development activities on questioning techniques led by our instructional leads using Engage NY resources and supports. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Creation of an inter-visitation schedule for teachers to observe each other using the NYC Inter-visitation toolkit. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal & Principal conducting individual teacher professional development and observation using the Advance Observation Toolkit. Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals & Lead Teachers Principal & Assistant Principals & Lead Teacher Principal & Assistant Principals & Lead Teacher Continue the improvement of teacher planning and executing high quality student centered, rigorous, differentiated, common core aligned lessons that are reflective of a coherent set of beliefs on the way each individual student learns best using Engage Ny resources and supports. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will present at parent association meetings and school leadership team three times a year (October 2018, January 2019 & May 2019) our professional development plan. The teachers and assistant principals of our professional development team will present to the parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Assistant Principals and teachers will meet during the school’s common planning period to evaluate the professional development program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, of the professional activities done and implemented through observations specifically evaluated Component 3b. will increase from 60% to 80% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation data summary for component 3b. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There is a strong teacher outreach with/to parents and parental involvement in our school. We have a curricula night for parents in September to visit school and teachers to learn about our curricula and the CCSS. Monthly parent newsletter and calendar is produced and sent to parents to keep them abreast of school events. Monthly parental workshops are conducted on topics selected by parent needs. The guidance staff sent letters home to parents re: student progress, graduation requirements; keeping a constant communication. Our Skedula/Pupilpath student/parent progress system allows for the constant accessibility to parents of their child's progress. Our priority is to increase parental participation by 20% on the Skedula/Pupilpath system. Guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals will conduct monthly parent workshops on the use of the Skedula/Pupilpath system. Data sources: Low parental use of Skedula/Pupilpath---40% NYC School Learning Environment Survey 2017---90% parents believe there is a collaborative partnership between parent and the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families as measured by a 3% increase in parents who agree or strongly agree on the collaborative partnership between parents and the school community section from spring 2019 NYC School Learning Environment Survey, compared to spring 2018 NYC School Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Monthly Parent Association meetings engaging parents Parents in activities which include roles and responsibilities of parental involvement and engagement.  Parent Curricula night event where parents meet and Parents greet their child's teachers and learn about the curricula of each sub  Parent Workshops and trainings involving activities to Parents help students transition to high school, conflict resolution between parent and children activities, suicide prevention and the importance of adolescence in today's time. Oct. 2018- June 2019 Oct. 2018-June 2019 Oct. 2018- June 2019  English Native Language Class for Parents weekdays from Parents 5:30 pm to 8:00 pm Monday - Thursday. Oct. 2018- June 2019  Monthly School Leadership Team meetings and activities to discuss school goals and evaluating them mid-year and end of year. Parents Oct. 2018 - June 2019  Inviting parents to Parent/Teacher conferences to receive student report cards and conference with teachers in November 2018 and March 2019. Parents  Parent involvement and engaged with celebratory Parents academic student activities, awards ceremonies, culture show, student graduation. Nov. 2018 and March 2019 Oct. 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. Principal, Assistant Principals, parents and selected school staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The parent coordinator, guidance counselors, assistant principals, teachers will keep constant contact with parents regarding student progress through phone calls, letters, school messenger, and Pupil-path. The parent handbook explaining curricula, rules and regulations, academic policy, attendance, and school information is sent to all parents. Students receive a student handbook with information they need to be successful in school. Per-session Funds to be used: teacher and supervisory. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase of parental log-in to Skedula by 50 % compared to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula parental access report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 11th and 12th grade students who did received less than 75% onthe ELA Regents Students who received less than 75% on the Algebra Common Core Math Regents. Students who received less than 65% on the Living Environment or Earth Science Regents examinations. Students who received less than 65% on the Global History and/or the United History Regents examinations. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Regents prep course during the school day and added to students program; Saturday School Regents preparation classes. Regents prep course during the school day and added to students program; Saturday School Regents preparation classes. Regents prep course during the school day and added to students program; Saturday School Regents preparation classes. Regents prep course during the school day and added to students program; Saturday School Regents preparation classes. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student in need for social and emotional health On-site Clinic Services and supports Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one to one tutoring and Saturday regents review classes When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school days and after school Small group, one to one tutoring and Saturday regents review classes During school days and after school Small group, one to one tutoring and Saturday regents review classes During school days and after school Small group, one to one tutoring and Saturday regents review classes During school days and after school During school days and after school Guidance Staff reviews records of all students; identify students who have exhibited at-risk behavior such as 2018-19 CEP 31  habitual tardiness, excessive absenteeism, patterns of cutting and lack of credit accumulation. Meetings with parents, schedule small group guidance sessions and hold individual guidance sessions. Case conferencing sessions. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 72 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1) Purchase emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books and eye glasses. 2) Purchase health items for STH students such as shampoo, deodorant, toothpaste, sanitizer) 3) Parental stipends for STH to attend workshops and meetings during school year. 4) Partial guidance counselor assigned to STH students for guidance services and support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A comprehensive needs assessment of the entire school that is based on information on the performance of children in relation to the State academic content and student academic achievement standards. Strategies for teacher recruitment and retention:  Attend teacher recruitment fairs.  Hire teachers that are highly qualified to teach core academic subjects.  Hire teachers that have dual certification.  Using Title I funding, support teachers who lack required courses to become highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers: on-site professional development twice a month by professional developers on our instructional foci for the 2018-2019 school year: Instructional Focus 1 Teachers will use writing strategies across all subject areas to check students’ comprehension and deepen their understanding of content by:  Teaching sentence expansion techniques 2018-19 CEP 35  Increasing vocabulary   Assessing ideas expressed in student writing  Providing feedback to support learning and revision Instructional Focus 2 Teachers will help students build knowledge in the content areas by increasing student access to complex texts across the curriculum using a variety of strategies including: close reading   explicit teaching of academic vocabulary and language objectives  interdisciplinary connections through content, texts and vocabulary Instructional Focus 3 Teachers will increase opportunities for student-to-student interaction by:  increasing the frequency of student-centered discussion  employing flexible grouping strategies  giving students access to tools and technologies that foster collaboration (e.g., Google Docs, Google Classroom) Principal/Assistant Principals will be professional developed by the Superintendent's office for 10 sessions during the 2017-2018 school year on strategies to evaluate staff through Advance professional development. Paraprofessionals will attend 6 sessions developed by the District Office on strategies to support students' ability to meet the CCS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Method and Structure:  The staff will identify 7 teachers who will be the professional developers for the 2017-2018 school year.  The team of 7 teachers will meet twice a month to: 1. co-planning activities/lessons/units/assessments 2. modeling strategies in the classroom 3. conferencing about students needs 4. analyzing student work 5. assisting in the classroom 6. observing teaching practice/ providing feedback In addition turn-keyers will develop with the teachers common assessments where they will be given six times a years and through professional development teachers will look at student assessments and conduct a gap analysis where curricula adjustments will be made as needed.  The professional developers will facilitate workshops for the rest of the staff twice a month. School Outcomes: 1. Our school will develop a team of teacher leaders (as mandated by QR 4.2) 2. Our school will support teachers through targeted professional development with differentiation strategies with a focus on 1e and 3d across all classrooms. (as mandated by QR 4.1) 3. Our school will increase our cohesive approach to instruction, specifically in the area of differentiation. (as mandated by QR *1.1 and *1.2) 4. Our school will increase effectiveness in areas 1e and 3d. (as mandated by QR *,1.2 and 2.2) 5. Our school will increase student outcomes and achievement as it relates to reading and writing standards in the Common Core. (as mandated by QR 3.4) *QR 1.1 and 1.2 are our school’s “Area of Focus” 2018-19 CEP 37  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4 n/a Section 4 n/a Section 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 367,385.00 0.00 26,702.00 0.00 3,829,411.00 X n/a X n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School for Law and Public Service, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students he High School for Law and Public Service will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 41  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Law and Public Service, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have 2 instructional programs that Title III funds will support: Saturday School: 30% Our Saturday school is designed to provide our English Language Learners additional instructional time to primarily address writing standards across subject areas. NYSESLAT data shows that the majority of our students are progressing at a far more rapid pace in the Reading modality, than Writing, and are progressing at a more moderate pace in Listening and Speaking. Writing lags by far the most in terms of overall progress. We want to see our students making strides in each modality. For students who have comparative data from 2017 and 2018, when examining how many students are "making strides" (defined by increasing 5 or more points in any one modality), we find a very encouraging trend for our students in their Reading scores. In 2018, 29% of students who have comparative data for 2017, increased 5 or more points in the Reading modality, whereas only 6% increased similarly in Writing. Annual comparative data shows that our students are "making strides" in Speaking and Listening at a moderate rate of 16%. Therefore, our Saturday program will focus intensively on writing across the subject areas, with reading as a launching point for writing activities. All writing activities during Saturday school will be proceeded by strategies to increase student to student interactions, which will allow practice in the Speaking and Listening modalities as well as fortify student writing output. These trends are similar across grade levels, so our program will focus on grades 9 - 12 and capitalize on multi-proficiency level groupings to foster student to student support. We plan to serve approximately 100 ELLs, including 40 Long Term ELLs and SIFE) in this program. We will make Long Term ELLs and SIFE a target population to track progress, but all ELLs will be invited and encouraged to attend. Our bilingual certified Assistant Principal will supervise instruction and programming as well as maintain weekly attendance records and perform weekly outreach to families of absent students. Notices in English and home language will be sent to families home at the start of each semester. Guidance counselors and our parent coordinator, funded through general school budget, will make follow up contact to parents for each student in the target population. This consistent communication is key to the success of a high attendance rate for this program. Our school's Instructional Focus is Writing Across the Curriculum with a special lens on ELL pedagogy, so professional development throughout the year for all Saturday school teachers will support these goals. Saturday school program begins in October and runs through June, every Saturday 9:00am - 1:00pm except holidays (22 sessions approximately, each class lasting 1 - 1.5 hours.) Certified bilingual teachers for this program include 2 social studies teachers, covering Global Studies and U.S. History, one ELA teacher, and one ENL teacher. A Physical Education teacher will be funded through general budget and will be offered for 1 hour for every student. Language of instruction will be English with Spanish support. We want to provide a physical outlet for students on Saturdays, so gym is always a favorite highlight of the day for our students. This strategy increases and maintains attendance to the program throughout the year. We will also plan 2 special movie outings each semester as a celebration for strong attendance. Social studies teachers develop many of the materials themselves for Saturday school with the support of a 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information picture rich Longman Social Studies texts and the English teacher pushes in and pulls out as needed to support this curriculum. The ELA and ENL teachers collaborate and use a Vocabulary Toolkit workbook in two levels to further support academic language acquisition. Neither of these materials is used during the regular school week in the classrooms. After School 30% Our After-School programs will focus on STEM subjects with a focused recruitment effort for our 11th and 12th grade ELL cohort. These cohorts lagged in credit accumulation in mathematics and sciences by 3% compared to their monolingual counterparts. We anticipate serving 25 - 30 ELLs in this program. Recruitment efforts and attendance is maintained by both teachers with family follow up support by guidance counselors and our parent coordinator. Fliers in English and home language will be mailed home each marking period (every 6 weeks to bolster attendance based on scholarship data (report cards.) We have had a popular and robust STEM club which meets once per week after school for 1.5 hrs which is led by an ENL teacher so the curriculum supports language objectives. Hands-on projects are presented each week, accompanied by slides and guests from organizations such as Solar One. Projects include building solar driven cars, planting rooftop vegetable garden plots, among others. Students also attend a math class one day after school per week taught by a bilingual certified math instructor. Each teacher creates curriculum materials based on the topics covered in each unit with English as the language of instruction with Spanish language support for our lower level proficiency ELLs. Students will improve comprehension of science content and increase subject specific vocabulary by writing extended responses to critical thinking prompts and narrative descriptions of each day's projects and procedures. The year culminates in a popular and well attended STEM overnight trip to a New York State environmental center where team building/outdoor activities and environmental lessons are taught. The changes made to your 2017-18 Title III Application have been saved and are only visible to provisioned users at your school. The changes made to your 2017-18 Title III Application have been saved and are only visible to provisioned users in your district. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Bilingual Inquiry Team comprised of all teachers, administrators and guidance counselors who directly teach and support our ELLs will participate in 2 professional development efforts, bilingual literacy and Social-Emotional Learning (SEL). We will work with a long-standing SBO partner, Morningside Center, to support our development in the area of Social Emotional Learning which we feel is integral to the academic success and general development of our ELL population, many of whom live apart from key family members or are newly arrived and need 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development support adjusting to a new culture and school system. The Morningside center consultant will be scheduled for 10 full days (bi-monthly Nov. - Jan.) to work beside teachers in their classrooms as well as provide de-brief conversations during planned conference times during the school day. We will also focus on Writing Across the Curriculum in Professional Learning sessions weekly lead by Lead Teachers. The Writing Revolution will guide our study with an emphasis on the differentiated strategies targeting lower proficiency level students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will utilize 10% of our Title III Supplemental funding to engage parents by providing Social-Emotional workshops for the parents of ELLs. We have found Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility's “Peace in the Family” workshops to be well received and much needed by our students and parents. Parents often tell us they "no longer know what to do" with their child now that they are teenagers or young adults. They report that communication has broken down in their home. For many students, the stress of learning a new language, being away from their native country and culture and sometimes split from one or both parents, causes emotional challenges, conflict and behavior problems. We will purchase a research-based SEL survey tool developed by PASS to gather data about students' self-regard and emotional status. Questions also relate to how students see themselves in the context of school and academics. The data will be used to select topics for our consultant to drill into during the workshops. One workshop per marking period, 6 in total, will be scheduled this year during alternating afternoon and evening 2 hour sessions. Worhsops are led by an experienced bilingual consultant with one certified ENL teacher present and co-facilitate. Our bilingual guidance counselor will track pre and post survey data to gauge impact. Follow-up lessons will be taught by our consultant in our Entering and Emerging classrooms where we believe some of our most emotionally fragile students exist. We will use PASS data early in the year to ensure an accurate target cohort. These parent activities will be announced through letters in English and all home languages generated by our parent coordinator and will be posted on our website. The parent coordinator maintains records of attendance and agendas.. General Calendar of Events: October: Peace in the Family Part I (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) November: Peace in the Family Part II (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) January: Peace in the Family Part III (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) March: Peace in the Family Part IV (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) April: Peace in the Family Part V (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) June: Peace in the Family Part VI (Topic to be developed based on PASS survey data) (Possible topics include: active listening, anger management, identifying sources of conflict, conflict resolution, developing grit, developing confidence, celebrating diversity) 2018-19 CEP 49 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 06 School Name High School for Law and Public Service School Number 467 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nicholas Politis Coach Elish Sari ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Aminatu Feinberg Teacher/Subject Area Quirse Dislaking/science Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Silverio/social studies Related-Service Provider Christopher Garcia Superintendent Manuel Ramirez, Community Six Assistant Principal Alexandra Brown Coach N/A School Counselor Jovani Almonte Parent Flor Reynoso Parent Coordinator Nelia Polanco Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 587 Total number of ELLs 213 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 36.29% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 1 1 2 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 1 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? N/A 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The prior year's NYSELAAT and EL Regents data including item analysis data, NYSESLAT Aligned Teacher created common assessments and Common Core ELA Aligned Teacher created assessments 2018-19 CEP 52  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We maintain an ENL inquiry team comprised of the certified ENL teachers and the assistant principal supervising ENL. The team performs a gap analysis based on the assessment data and plan intervention units throughout the year. This year we plan to expand the ENL Inquiry Team to include the bilingual teachers in order to incorporate subject area assessment data and align efforts for targeted language, reading, writing and problem solving skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are not a K-5 school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We utilize all data available to us on EDAT, RLAT and ATS to make programming decisions for ELLs. Students receive the appropriate level and minutes of ENL based on NYSESLAT data for example. Regents exam data helps to determine whether a student will receive additional support in Regents prep classes. We utilize data provided on these systems to compare grade level cohorts, ELL and non-ELL cohorts to better understand our instructional and professional development needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are first reviewed in administrator cabinet meetings. Then the data is reviewed and analyzed by staff in weekly subject team meetings, professional learning sessions and/or inquiry teams. The ENL Coordinator and all subject area APs work closely with guidance counselors to understand the implications and conclusions drawn based on the data in order to make program adjustments, design interventions, mandate after school or Saturday school tutoring and attendance or to re-focus professional learning activities. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in this program receive ENL instruction based on homogeneous groupings for proficiency level. Instruction will be delivered in accordance to CR Part 154.2 through instruction by a certified ENL instructor and integrated with certified ELA instructors for the appropriate minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in this program also receive ENL instruction based on homogeneous groupings for proficiency level. Instruction will be delivered in accordance to CR Part 154.2 through instruction by a certified ENL instructor and integrated with certified ELA instructors for the appropriate minutes. Whenever numbers allow, students are not programmed with peers in grades spanning beyond 2 contiguous years. For bilingual subject area classes, students in one grade often travel as a block in mixed proficiency levels. c. DL program. If applicable. DL will be a new program in our school this year and as such we will only program incoming 9th graders who opt in to this program choice. Students in this new program will be provided ENL and ELA instruction in homogeneous groups based on proficiency level, but will be blocked together as a group for all other subject area classes. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school administrators create a program according to the number of students who have been assessed at each proficiency level. The program adheres strictly to the mandated minutes based on CR-154-2 in accordance with chart 5.1. In addition to the NYSESLAT results, ENL teachers administer a brief in-class assessment within the first week of school in order to assess students’ abilities in each modality to ensure that placements are correct. The ENL Coordinator checks all ELL’s programs at the beginning of each semester to make sure that they are correctly placed in classes and that they are receiving the mandated minutes. All students receive the mandated minutes and adjustments are made promptly based on EDAT and ELL Data Update Reports from DELLs. Once ELLs reach the 12th grade, if they have not passed the ELA Regents exam, they are programmed for an additional ELA Regents preparation support class, in addition to their ENL and ELA classes, in order to provide strategic support based on Regents data and gap analysis. All ELLs are programmed for 1 unit of HLA during the school year. Again, it is the ENL coordinator's responsibility to review students' programs for compliance and file them in a secure location in our guidance office as well as in the ENL office. Guidance counselors notify the ENL coordinator of any program changes throughout the year. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All bilingual core content area classes (science, math, and social studies) are taught using ENL methodology including an emphasis on academic and content specific word knowledge to increase reading and writing accuracy, visual learning tools provide additional scaffolding, as well as differentiated instruction with multiple entry points planned throughout learning units. Bilingual content area courses use ENL strategies such as sequencing, multiple and varied exposures to new words, graphic organizers and mapping to enhance language acquisition while focusing on content specific course work parallel to the general education curriculum in order to prepare students for the annual Regents examinations. Illustrated dictionaries, content area specific glossaries in Spanish, and translation dictionaries (in English, French, Chinese and Arabic) are available in bilingual subject area classrooms, and Longman texts series, designed specifically for ELL content support, are utilized in the classroom and during Saturday school literacy enhancement classes. ELLs who are at risk of failing ENL or a content area class are targeted for Saturday Academy classes. Outreach to families is made by guidance counselors and administrators to ensure Saturday Academy attendance. Instruction is delivered in one language at a time (avoiding code-switching) with increasing dependence on English as the dominant language of delivery as the year progresses. Native Language supplement materials and instruction is provided during after-school tutoring as the year progresses and as English becomes more dominant in the content area classrooms. In the Dual Language program cohort, instruction is provided in a side-by side model, alternating L1 and L2 (English and Spanish) on a daily basis and color-coded visual supplements are provided to further support dual language acquisition. Course content in all ELL program classes are rigorous, collaborative in nature, student-centered and meet state mandated standards. All content area teachers, ENL teachers and HLA teachers map a Common Core aligned curricula implement Common Core submitted to and reviewed by administrative supervisors and implement Common Core aligned tasks into their classrooms. An inquiry team comprised of bilingual content teachers, ENL teachers and HLA teachers will meet monthly to review and co-map Common Core skills so that common skills are covered across subject areas whenever possible. ENL teachers work with ELA teachers to consult on Common Core task designs and assessments.Enrichment/elective classes such as art, P.E. and Law classes are taken in English with the General Education population. These non-core classes are taught utilizing visual aids and collaborative group work approaches. ENL classes are taught by licensed ENL teachers. The Title III Program is supervised by a licensed administrator. All bilingual content area classes are taught by highly qualified teachers with state certification and bilingual extensions except where current budget constrains our ability to hire new teachers. One math teacher is presently pursuing a bilingual extension. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are admitted, they are asked to produce a sample writing piece in English and Spanish. Most 9th grade ELLs are placed in Native Language Arts level 3 and continue a sequence through level 6 and then on to AP Spanish Language 2018-19 CEP 54  and AP Spanish Literature by the tjme they are seniors. Ongoing assessments in HLA classes occurs throughout the year. Bilingual content area teachers provide unit assessments and writing assignments in native language and in English language. Usually assessments are offered in the dominant language of the classroom which tends to be more native language towards the beginning of the year and more English towards the end of the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently SIFE students are integrated into all of the bilingual and ENL classes depending on their current level of proficiency according to the NYSESLAT. We have fully integrated the differentiated literacy program, Achieve 3000, which was specifically acquired, along with a classroom set of Macintosh laptop computers, to support both long-term LEP students and Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). This program is designed to develop both English language and native language proficiency in reading and writing. After an initial formal assessment, students are provided with daily texts adapted to their respective reading levels and followed by a series of activities culminating in a writing activity which is then assessed by the ENL teacher. The students’ progress is continuously monitored by the teacher, who provides regular instructional feedback. Additional instructional lesson elements are integrated into the class time to further support SIFE. Home Language Arts teachers use the program in the same way. The students are exposed to this software an average of one 90 minute periods per week during the regular school day in addition to one 45 minute NLA period per week. SIFE students also receive support in other subject areas through a Visual Learning series as well as other age appropriate texts designed to support ELLs in the content areas are purchased specifically for the bilingual classroom for social studies and science. Interactive Smartboard technology is utilized in math and social studies classes to motivate active participation and provide visual supports for demonstrations. Oral presentations are an integral component of these classrooms as well. After school tutoring is extended to SIFE and Long-Term ELLs at least once per week by every bilingual and ENL instructor. Saturday school is also offered to SIFE and LT. We continue to partner with Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility to assist in addressing the additional social and emotional needs of this population. Conflict resolution, communication skills, anger management along with other character building skills are addressed. b. Our newcomers are programmed into ENL classes according to their literacy needs. We follow the protocols outlined in the section above to determine if they are ELLs and then assess their proficiency level. In response to an increase of newcomers to our school over the past several years, we have partnered with the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility to help us address the additional social and emotional needs of this population (see above SIFE section). An after-school literacy class, taught by an ENL certified instructor, utilizes an age appropriate text, Inside USA, to further support newcomer language learning. c. For ELL students receiving 4-6 years of service, differentiated instruction takes place in each classroom. Collaborative group work is a regular feature in order to encourage verbal communication and collaboration. Our Common Core Aligned textbook series provides student workbooks that are differentiated specifically for ELLs. Mock trials, debates and other forms of class presentations are implemented as long-term projects and forms of assessment. ENL teachers often choose literature for this subgroup in several typically high interest genres including mystery, horror, science fiction and romance. Graphic novels are also utilized which supports language acquisition as well as engages students who are traditionally visual learners and/or interested in art. Students in this subgroup also take the appropriate level native language arts to support their native language literacy. d. Differentiated methodology targeting Long Term ELLs is similar to that of our SIFE students in the ENL classes. We purchased the research-based English 3D curriculum materials for use in our transitional ENL classes where many of our Long term ELLs are placed. In addition, we are using Kinsella’s Academic Language Toolkit series in Saturday Academy classes where a group of Long Term ELLs attend for additional support. We expose them to 90 minutes of Achieve 3000 per week in the English language version and this year we will implement 45 minutes per week in the Spanish language version. We are also continuing to develop a balanced literacy approach in the HLA classes to support our long-term ELLs who vary in their native language proficiency. Well organized group work, close reading activities, and providing print rich environments are other 2018-19 CEP 55  methodologies stressed for this subgroup. e. Former ELLs receive the same test accommodations as the current ELLs. They are tested in the same rooms as the other ELLs and receive the same time accommodations, reading accommodations, and glossary accommodations for 2 years after they test on the proficient level. We provide an additional English Regents prep class that meets on period per day for ELLs and former ELLs in their senior year if they have not yet passed the exam. This is in addition to their regular English class. ELLs who have recently passed the NYSESLAT with a score of proficient are placed in transitional ESL classes until the teacher assess, through various class assessments (writing, reading, speaking, listening) that they are ready for a general education class. Through inter-disciplinary Professional Learning Communities teachers consult with one another regarding the progress former ELLs are making, general education teachers differentiate instruction to try to meet the needs of formal ELLs and course adjustments are made if necessary. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students who are identified as ELLs having special needs receive ENL and bilingual services based on each students’ Individual Education Plan whenever possible. Students who have resource room supports on their IEP receive those services in conjunction content area classes or receive special reading support and/or speech therapy from a certified speech therapy teacher when mandated. Our Common Core Aligned textbook series provides student workbooks that are differentiated specifically for ELLs as well as differntiated for SWDs. Visual Learning materials play a prominent role in instruction for this population as well as hand-on projects and multiple exposures to words in a variety of contexts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have ICT classes in our instructional program across all content areas. As faculty receives additional training in ICT, we have been able to increase the effectiveness of our inclusion classrooms. If a student is identified as struggling in the environment, we convene a meeting of all of the student’s teachers and counselor and discuss possible instructional approaches or alternative settings. If necessary we re-convene an IEP meeting with the parent to discuss alternative classroom settings, but only when many instructional supports in the ICT classroom have been exhausted. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions in subject areas such as science and social studies include mandated after school tutoring and/or Saturday School tutoring. Tutoring is provided in native language. We also run a Saturday Academy for additional credit accumulation for a target population of ELLs who would benefit from such a program. The classes offered include a social studies elective which supports the Global and U.S. History curriculum as well as English language. We have created an additional intervention for ELLs that targets credit accumulation as well as SEL development. The program is a Peer Mentor program called "Lift" (or "Impulza") whereby higher achieving ELLs in the upper grades are paired with and mentor younger lower achieving and struggling ELLs. the program meets in a lunch and learn atmosphere 3 times per week. mentors are trained by teachers and our SEL consultant once per week and they turnkey activities with their mentees. Writing activities are scaffolded and based on high interest academic field trips to provide cross-disciplinary literacy enrichment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This upcoming year, we will continue the Bilingual Student Peer Mentoring Program we initiated mid-year last year called "LIFT". Based on achievement data, the students in this cohort improved their credit accumulation over time. A robust team of ENL, bilingual teachers, administrators and guidance counselors collaborate to coordinate this program. Data is reviewed by the team monthly and adjustments to program curriculum and activities is made accordingly. For example, this year, we will address cross-disciplinary reading deficiencies by adding a differentiated independent reading component support by ENL teachers. We will be looking for additional curriculum resources for content areas such as Global Studies, U.S. History, Living Environment., and Earth Science. We will also research and purchase appropriate curriculum resources for our new Dual Language program. 2018-19 CEP 56  We plan to enhance the implementation of our independent reading experience for our ELLs based on our new ENL leveled library which will provide literature and informational text options for every level of ENL. The main aspect of our delivery of instruction that we will focus on improving this year through professional development is providing quality integrated instruction since this is mandated by CR-154 and new to our school and to improve pedagogical practices regarding differentiated instruction for different learning groups. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There are essentially no school programs that we offer that are not available to our ELL groups. For example, all clubs including the after school theater group and cooking classes are open to all. After school tutoring is provided by all teachers whether on a regular basis or on an appointment basis. Saturday school is an important supplement to our ELL program supplemental piece. We offer bilingual content area tutoring on this extra day of instruction. Our Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding ELL students may take a law sequence although our law classes are not taught by bilingual certified instructors. Last year, our student government president was a newly Commanding ELL. Finally, our public service component is an integral part of our school and everyone in the school community is expected to participate in-house or out-of-house. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Picture dictionaries, Spanish/English Chinese/English, French/English and Arabic/English dictionaries and spelling dictionaries as well as an array of visual rich reference materials are available and utilized in our lowest level ENL classrooms. Subject specific visual learning resources are utilized in the bilingual science and social studies classrooms. Interactive Smartboard technology is often utilized in the bilingual mathematics classroom. Achieve 3000, the differentiated literacy online program is utilized by all bilingual students in ENL and NLA classes. We have a large library of literature for full classroom use for all levels of ENL. Many adapted titles are included in this library. A wide variety of new common core aligned texts for all levels of ENL have been purchased for use this year including an ELA textbook published by Holt MacDougal and an accompanying workbook differentiated for ELLs, Kate Kinsella’s English 3D curriculum and workbooks, National Geographic’s Reading Explorer and Reading Adventures texts, Inside the U.S.A. and Kinsella’s Academic Toolkit and Pearson/Longman social studies texts. We have a Spanish language balanced literacy classroom library that is varied by genre and well differentiated by reading level in the NLA classrooms. Our Common Core Aligned textbook series provides student workbooks that are differentiated specifically for ELLs. Our ENL leveled library provides literature and informational text options for every level of ENL. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All of our native Spanish speaking ELLs receive Spanish language/literature classes through the 12th grade, including Advanced Placement. We believe that with the added support provided in a language classroom, our students will be better served. We offer a full program of study of Spanish Native Language Arts with the opportunity for our students to not only fulfill their basic Spanish language requirement but also to take Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Literature classes during their high school career. Spanish/English dictionaries classroom sets are available to students in NLA classrooms, and a balanced literature library in Spanish language is utilized by multi levels. The Spanish language version of Achieve 3000 is implemented in every NLA class for 45 minutes per week. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As a high school, all classes across subject area are grade and age appropriate. Texts are NYSTL approved and aligned to grade band Common Core Standards. ENL trade books are purchased at all levels for age appropriate topics and titles. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We integrate all sports teams, have occasional joint assemblies, joint prom and graduation ceremonies. We also have college and career access office and a common parent office. ELLs and an integral part of each of these components of our school. 2018-19 CEP 57  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). An incoming 9th grade orientation meeting is planned during the summer (June/July/August) preceding the new academic school year. This is an orientation for monolingual and bilingual students. All ninth grade teachers are invited to participate and provide an overview of our school course offering and expectations. Students also take a math placement test and complete a brief writing sample for teachers to review. For the past five summers, we have run a summer bridge program during the last week of August. All Freshmen including ELLs are invited to attend. The program involves general orientation activities, academic classes, advisory classes, social-emotional lessons and public service and field trips to a college and outdoor education center. We have ENL teachers included among the staff of summer bridge faculty. We also have a team of upperclassmen peer mentors, including bilingual students, who lead activities and assist in running the program. The presentation of our ELL program choices as well as a viewing of the video is provided for families of ELLs. An additional orientation also takes place within the first ten days of the school year to serve our newcomers as well. Our certified ENL coordinator leads these meetings with the assistance of our new certified bilingual guidance counselor and our bilingual parent coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer a full array of Spanish Native Language Arts classes including Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Advanced Placement Language Spanish Literature. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. This will be our first year with a DL program. As such only the 9th grade will have a DL cohort. This cohort will have a side by side program where at least 50% of the day the ELLs and EPs will be integrated. b. Core content in the targeted subjects will be taught in English and Spanish. c. The languages will be separated on an alternating daily basis. d. Both languages will be taught simultaneously in ENL/ELA classrooms and HLA/Spanish classrooms. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A professional inquiry team comprised of ENL and bilingual content area teachers meet monthly after school to share best practices, read current research and professional literature, and collect and analyze student data. These meetings help inform instruction and curricular choices as well as testing preparation supports. The ENL department (all 3 licensed instructors) also meets on a bi-weekly basis to discuss strategies for specific at-risk students, align curriculum to the common core standards, co-design mid-year and final year class assessments, and organize the administration of the NYSESLAT. All ENL and NLA instructors will also participate in professional development with our consultant from Achieve 3000 on two separate days in the Fall (one in October and one in November). This will facilitate our initial implementation of this on-line literacy three times throughout the school year. PL meetings will be dedicated to the school-wide instructional foci: "Accessing Complex Texts" and "Increasing Student to Student Interactions". A special in-house team of bilingual teachers will turnkey PL activities aligned to our instructional 2018-19 CEP 58  foci and targeting ELLs. This team of ENL and bilingual teachers will receive support through consultants from a CBO, Teaching Matters. We will provide targeted PD for differentiation within ENL/Bilingual classrooms. We will also seek support for teachers working in an “Integrated classrooms” since this will be a new collaborative model for us and we anticipate that some guidance and training for techniques for this type of collaboration will be helpful. We will also collaborate with the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility who provide social-emotional learning support for the school community. We believe that our immigrant population will benefit from not only language acquisition interventions but also supports regarding their social-emotional and character development. School, neighborhood and home life can be stressful for any teenager, but compounded by the issues accompanying the immigrant experience, students can buckle under pressure and confusion. We aim to provide supports through a sound research-based curriculum to help students, particularly in the 9th and 10th graders, negotiate conflict, make good, informed decisions and develop good interpersonal skills. A series of 8 trainings will take place between January and May and will be implemented in the classroom through their ENL classes. As stated above, the ENL department (all 3 licensed instructors) meet on a bi-weekly basis and address the alignment of curriculum to the common core standards. HLA teachers also meet once per month to develop common core aligned tasks and discuss the new curriculum developed by the Office of ELLs. Teaching Matters consultants will help provide targeted PD on integrating Common Core standards for ELLs. These PD's will occur bi-monthly in individual coaching sessions as well as group PD workshops in house. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development for the entire staff (general education teachers, special education teachers, teachers of ELLs, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator, secretaries, school aides, assistant principals and principal) participate in faculty PL sessions bi-weekly. We also will work intensively with consultants from a CBO Teaching Matters twice per month. This year we will focus on our instructional foci, student discourse and what this looks like for ELLs. Between the various meetings we easily exceed 7.5 hours of ELL focused pedagogical support. Records for professional development are maintained in binders: Professional Learning Communities, organized by grade level teams, also meet once per week and keep daily agendas and minutes in a binder, department chairs also maintain records of agendas for all Subject Area Team Meetings and Professional Development activities. Teachers sign-in at each of these meetings and activities and these records are also maintained in binders. The binders are submitted to the principal twice per year (once at the end of each semester) for review for Jose P. credit among other mandated trainings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the first PTA meetings of each semester (September and January), the certifies ENL and bilingual teachers will set up a conference room to invite parents of ELLs to individually meet with a staff member to discuss program and curriculum goals and answer any questions about the program or their child. The Assistant Principal of ENL and the ENL Coordinator will create and publish a short handbook in English and Spanish to support these meetings and to maintain consistency of information. We will document attendance with sign-in lists. We will document attendance for individual meetings with ELL families with sign-in lists. A spreadsheet will be maintained containing attendance tallies so we can analyze patterns at the end of the year and make additional outreach with phone calls accordingly. Invitations to these meetings will be provided by mailing a flier home (translated in appropriate languages.) 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Monthly PTA meeting are run by our bilingual Parent Coordinator and are translated in Spanish. At each PTA meeting a representative from one subject area presents curriculum overviews and takes questions.. The Parent Coordinator and/or ELL 2018-19 CEP 59  Coordinator run the sessions in English and Spanish. Parents are invited to special classroom presentations as well as semi-annual awards ceremonies. All outgoing correspondence to parents is sent in both English and Spanish. The PTA organizes several events to honor the entire faculty in our school. These celebratory events serve to foster connections between parents and staff and are organized by and well attended by our ELL parent body. Through the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, we provide a series of workshops on "Peace in the Family". Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nicholas Poliitis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Law and Public Service School DBN: 06M467 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nick Politis Title Principal Alexandra Brown Assistant Principal Nelia Polanco Parent Coordinator Elish Sari ENL/Bilingual Teacher Flor Reynoso Parent Quotes Dislaking Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Silverio Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Jovani Almonte School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Alice Cohen N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M467 School Name: H.S. for Law & Public Service Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nelia Polanco Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We have surveyed our parents and used the ATS Parent Preferred Language report to assess our parents' language and translation preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 233 33.3 229 32.7 2018-19 CEP 63  Spanish Arabic French American Sign Language 455 9 1 0 65.0 1.3 .14 0 457 9 2 1 65.3 1.3 .29 .13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Guidance--Graduation requirements, meeting requests, et. el Monthly-2018-2019 Parent Newsletter Monthly 2018-2019 School Calendar September 2018 -JUNE 2019 Report Card/Progress Reports November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 & June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We translate all materials that are sent home. Guidance Staff, parent coordinator, assistant principals assist with the translation. Use translation funds to translate low incident, student specific not covered DOE languages. We translate all materials that are sent home. Guidance Staff, parent coordinator, assistant principals assist with the translation. Use translation funds to translate low incident, student specific not covered DOE languages. We translate all materials that are sent home. Guidance Staff, parent coordinator, assistant principals assist with the translation. Use translation funds to translate low incident, student specific not covered DOE languages. We translate all materials that are sent home. Guidance Staff, parent coordinator, assistant principals assist with the translation. Use 2018-19 CEP 64  translation funds to translate low incident, student specific not covered DOE languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Association Meetings Monthly- 2018-2019 Open School Evening/Afternoon November 2018 & March 2019 Guidance Meetings As needed Curriculum Nights September 2018 provide interpretation service(s)? School staff will provide translation services to parents. Staff will look up language access resources to meet communication needs. School staff will provide translation services to parents. Staff will look up language access resources to meet communication needs. School staff will provide translation services to parents. Staff will look up language access resources to meet communication needs. School staff will provide translation services to parents. Staff will look up language access resources to meet communication needs. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 1) In the event of a school emergency, we will use the school messenger system to communicate with the LEP families and we will have staff make phone calls. We can also have staff make home visits. 2) All staff will be informed of DOE translation and interpretation resources so that bilingual staff may be used only when necessary. Use of Language Line by monolingual teachers and staff. 3) Staff can submit translation requests to the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 65  1) The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide periodic training to parent coordinators and other key school-based personnel on the language access requirements contained in this regulation and on resources available to support these requirements. 2) Use of Language Line during trainings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1) We utilize resources provided in the Language Access Kit to inform parents of their rights and services regarding translation and interpretation in school. 2) Professional development for all staff members on September 5, 2018 on language access during the faculty meeting. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We welcome open discussions at PA meetings facilitated by the parent coordinator. Surveys will be provided in other language by using the DOE translation services. 2018-19 CEP 66 
