2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M494 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL OF ARTS AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: MARIELA GRAHAM 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information H. S. of Arts and Technology 03M494 333797 9-12 122 Amsterdam Avenue 212-501-1198 School Number (DBN): 917-441-3693 Phone Number: Leah Grabelsky Fax: lgrabelsky@hsartstech.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Mariela Graham DebbeCordts ScherissDuckett C. Alex Castillo TBD Shon Dixon Israel Salles Abdul-QawiyAbdul-Karim CBO Representative: Geographical District: Affinity Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, N.Y., N.Y. fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3744 Phone Number: Fax: 212-356-7514 Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alex Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3287 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarielaGraham DebbeCordts SherissDuckett Roy Balgobin TBD ShonDixon Israel Salles *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Abdul-QawiyAbdul-Karim CBO Representative, if applicable TBD Michelle Edwards Member/ Staff-teacher UFT Member/ parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) C. Alex Castillo Member/ Staff, Chair TBD TBD TBD Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: The mission of the High School of Arts and Technology is to engage students in rich and rigorous learning experiences that build the academic, technological, interpersonal and leadership skills needed to achieve excellence in post-secondary education and in their chosen careers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As of September 2017, the High School of Arts & Technology is under new leadership. With a three-year school-improvement plan, new leadership is building structures and programs in three distinct areas: Culture, Instruction and Operations. 1. 1. 1. Within school culture, we are working to raise expectations by providing students with more college and career opportunities, creating positive environments utilizing incentive systems and culturally-responsive relationships, the Resilient Scholars Program and relying on restorative practices as our preferred approach to conflict. We are strengthening and better defining the role of two distinct Culture Teams, one that focuses on enrichment, school spirit and student voice (through Student Council), and another that aims to change and improve our community’s response to challenges and conflict. With our PRIDE core values (Perseverance, Rigor, Inquiry, Diversity and Empathy) as the foundation, our whole school community is invested in creating and maintaining a culture of equitable achievement as well as fun. 2. Within the area of instruction, we are working to raise academic rigor by utilizing a critical thinking framework that embraces close reading, critical discussion and argument writing. In addition to making our critical thinking framework a school-wide practice, we have also increased the number of Advanced Placement offerings. In 2018-2019 we have added AP Language and Composition, a course known to prepare high school students for the rigor of college-level studies. We will continue to utilize the Mock Regents program and in partnership with Urban Assembly, we are also providing teachers with extensive supports on how to raise rigor using data (data from Mock Regents, Dexpro, DRP, etc). As increasing rigor and expectations for all students is a key goal of this new administration, we are using inquiry teams to build more culturally-responsive pedagogy. We have also reorganized our special education program to increase more ICT classes and reduce the number of self-contained classes. We believe that with stronger, more targeted supports, our students with IEPs can thrive in a more integrated and inclusive setting. 3. Our third area of focus is Operations, specifically to raise efficiency in all areas through improved leadership development, increased collaboration with other schools in the MLK campus and continuous examination of various roles and responsibilities as they relate to the changing needs and goals of the HS of Arts & Technology. In the 2018-2019 school year, we are participating in the shared goal of making the MLK campus a more welcoming environment. As such, several Arts & Technology students will be Student Ambassadors, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  greeting and escorting visitors in the building. We are also spearheading an intervisitation program that allows for shared learning across the six schools. Important information to note about the HS of Arts & Technology for the 2018-2019 school year also include: a) we are now a part of Urban Assembly, a non-profit organization that provides extensive supports for 22 schools throughout NYC; b) we are now a part of Affinity Field Support Center whose additional supports focus exclusively on high schools; c) we welcome 16 new teachers to our school and this change in staffing was part of a purposeful realignment of the school’s values and mission. Of the 16 new teachers, 11 are first year teachers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The High School of Arts & Technology currently has 530 students (as of 10/1). Notable sub-populations include:  33% of students are female  Over 80% of students qualify for free/reduced lunch  70 students live in temporary housing (1 in 8)  28% of students have IEPs  11% of students are English Language Learners In the 2018-2019 school year, we hired an additional social worker using Bridging the Gap funding to support our high number of students in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-2018, our new leadership team introduced one aspect of the critical thinking framework: argument writing. Over the course of the year, an inquiry team used improvement science to continuously refine the argument writing rubric until the final version which can be used across three departments. Departments met weekly and used several protocols – looking at student work and the calibration protocols – to examine students’ argument essays. By the end of the year, we noted that over 80% of students increased argument writing skills according to our school-wide rubric. Another area of improved progress was co-teaching. Co-teaching partnerships were established, and norms were created to ensure equitable division of responsibility and classroom delivery of instruction. Using the School Survey as a metric, our scores improved in Rigorous Instruction, Effective Leadership, Supportive Environment, Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust. The greatest areas of positive change were in Effective Leadership and Trust. We believe that the improved scores in Effective Leadership were due to our commitment to increased transparency between administration and teachers as well as the creation for authentic opportunities for teacher voice and input. We believe that improved scores in Trust are a result of the aforementioned transparency that existed not only between administration and teachers but among all relationships in the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M494 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 504 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 35 10 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 82.5% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 56.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 65% 70.2% 0.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 51 44 77.8% 1.2% 24.0% 34.3% 5.0% 2.0% 4 15% 11.7 N/A N/A 67% 70% 70.3% 9% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, we established the practice of argument writing in each core subject class as well as maintaining a writing folder in each class that allowed teachers to give rubric-based feedback and actionable next steps. The Learning Environment Survey, in the Rigorous Instruction portion, revealed that students felt more prepared for high-level academic writing. While we noticed in general students have improved in their argument writing skills, they still struggle with identifying the most appropriate evidence to support their claim and often analyze it only superficially. This was also evident in the Regents scores on the essay portions of social studies and English exams. As a result, in 2018-2019, we will dedicate professional learning time and classroom instruction time to teaching close reading strategies and increasing opportunities for critical discussions. By providing students with thought-provoking texts and the skills to understand and analyze them, and then giving them the forum to challenge and develop their analyses, we believe that students’ argument writing skills will improve. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will improve their close-reading skills and critical discussion abilities as evidenced by greater or equal to 70% of students scoring 3s and 4s on the "elaboration" category of the school-wide argument writing rubric. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Department Leads will work with AP to develop/facilitate/support professional learning and expectations in the form of department meetings, intervisitations, and writing folders. ELA, SS, Math, Science Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers Most department Leads will participate in outside professional learning opportunities that complement our Rigorous Instruction goal. (SS will participate in Affinity Fellows: Teacher Leaders; ELA will participate in AP for ALL PLC as a Peer Collaborative Teacher; Math will participate in Urban Assembly Algebra Success PLC). ELA, SS and Math Department Leads Sept 2018 -June 2019 Affinity and UA Partners, AP for ALL PLC, administrators and Department Leads Content area teams meet regularly to look at student work, calibrate writing expectations, and share strong practices. Extensive work in this area will take place at our November retreat. ELA, SS, Math, Science Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers We will partner with Elevate as part of AP for All and ensure that all AP students receive a three-day study skills workshop. One key piece of Elevate’s program is close reading. AP students October 2018 We will invite parents to observe close reading and critical discussion in their child’s classes. We will then provide parents with a short lesson on how to practice these skills as well. Parents, teachers Feb - May 2019 AP students, AP teachers, Elevate/ AP for All, administrators Parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be involved in our Rigorous Instruction goal through the following ways: 1. Parents and families will be invited to visit specific classrooms to see close reading and critical discussion in action in their child’s classes. 2. Parents and families of AP students will be invited to a presentation by Elevate (in November) that explains how families can support students’ study skills and academic progress. A key feature of Elevate’s program is close reading. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3. Teachers maintain grades online through Jupiter Grades and they will stay in touch with families regarding their students' progress During parent – teacher conferences, students will be able to share their writing folders with their parents as a reference for academic progress. 4. The website includes curricular information that can help parents understand what their child is learning. 5. The weekly Family Bulletin will have a recurring section about curriculum and classroom learning expectations that align to our Rigorous Instruction goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Material Resources include: folders for all students for all major subjects so that their writing can be stored in the classroom and used for regular reference; bins to help teachers organize these folders; Jupiter Grades; Newsela subscription Human Resources include: per session to meet with Department Leads, per diem to cover teachers’ programs when they are at PD meetings during school hours; parent coordinator will coordinate spring parent/family visits to classrooms; AP Grabelsky will have regular meetings with Department leads Other Resources include: A staff-wide retreat to share best practices and develop a better understanding of close reading and critical discussion as they relate to argument writing; utilizing partnerships with AP for All, Affinity and Urban Assembly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All students will write at least three argument essays in ELA, and six argument essays in Science and Social Studies. By midyear, students should have written at least one argument essay in ELA and three in Science and Social Studies. At the midyear point, we examine the feedback as well as the progress of students’ writing based on the school-wide argument writing rubric. The first, middle, and last essays will be scored with the school-wide rubric and be used as formative data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess the argument essays we will use the school-wide argument writing rubric, which teachers developed collaboratively last year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2017-2018, we employed restorative practices as well as increased administration visibility to reduce the number of incidences in the school as well as the number of suspensions. While incidences and suspensions have decreased, we still need to create the structures for a more positive learning environment that will help prevent situations that can lead to OORS incidences and suspensions. We are using school attendance as the metric by which to measure the extent of our supportive and positive learning environment. We are also using our new partnership with Urban Assembly to bolster our attention and approaches to ensuring that students have more social-emotional tools to better contribute to a positive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have created a more positive and school-spirited learning environment as evidenced by an increase of three percent (3%) of students with over 90% attendance from 47% to 50%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will create a new attendance committee spearheaded by our new Social Worker/ Attendance Coordinator. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Social workers, guidance counselors, administration, parent coordinator and attendance teacher. BTG Social Worker Our BTG Social Worker will conduct regular check ins with students in temporary housing. Our School Culture committees will meet weekly; initially UA staff will also attend culture meetings. School Culture Committee (A) will create events including FunFest Fridays to bolster school spirit. School Culture Committee (A) will empower our Student Council to advocate for programs and changes that they believe will enhance their academic experience. School Culture Committee (B) will establish a Peer Mediation program working with Restorative Justice, SSOPE partnership. Sept 2018 - June 2019 Students in Temporary Housing All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Culture Team, UA, Administration All students, Student Council Sept 2018 - June 2019 Culture Team, Student Council, Administration All students; peer mediators Sept 2018 - June 2019 Culture Team, SSOPE, administration Attendance Committee will create regular attendance incentives. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Attendance committee At least three administrators will be present at lunch and in hallways at all times. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators School administrators, each responsible for one cohort, will create trips, incentives and other spirit-raising events. All students, by cohort Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and teachers There will be protocols established for students to access immediate supports including RJ social worker, RJ coordinator, Resilient Scholars social work intern, guidance intern, SAPIS counselor and other support staff. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and support staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Parents and families will remain involved through: 1. 1. 1. 1. Regular phone and in-person communication with support staff. 2. A dedicated administrator to address concerns and circumstances. 3. Our new website includes all contact information for families. 4. BlackBoard Connect automated calls related to attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Material Resources include: prizes for attendance incentives; printing of posters that announce school events and programs; BlackBoard Connect license/ membership; Human Resources include: BTG social worker; RJ/ SSOPE social worker; RJ/SSOPE coordinator; guidance intern; RSP social work intern; SAPIS counselor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will track progress monthly using the Progress to Graduation tracker, Dexpro tools (for attendance), Incident/ contact logs kept by social workers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS and Dexpro tools will be used to measure and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, the overwhelming majority of teachers had Common Planning Time as their Circ. 6 assignment. As a result, teachers were given a lot of time to collaborate. We focused and organized the time so that teachers had regular department meeting time, time with co-teachers and other such configurations. In 2018-2019 we have added 16 new teachers are joining the faculty at the HS of Arts & Technology, 11 of whom are first-year teachers. As such, we need to ensure that we can provide teachers with differentiated support with special attention given to our first – year teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers new to our school and/or teaching will participate in supplemental and differentiated professional learning workshops as evidenced by a steady improvement on the Danielson rubric between October 2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24 and June 2019, specifically in components 1e (Lesson Planning), 3b (Questioning & Discussion Techniques) and 3d (Assessment). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will lead a New Teacher Orientation before the 2018-2019 school year begins to onboard new teachers to systems and structures of our school, basic teacher expectations related to professionalism and Danielson, and our plan for ongoing support. We will offer ongoing New Teacher PD in the form of lesson planning support after school with an Instructional AP, Friday morning breakfasts with the principal, classroom management/culture support with a School Culture AP. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) New teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers New teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers We will select New Teacher Mentors purposefully and administrators will meet with them on a monthly basis. New Teacher Mentors will also be compensated 2hrs of per session a month as an acknowledgement of the added work and the importance of their contribution. All teachers, including new teachers, will be strategically grouped into one of three Professional Learning Networks that will be supported by an administrator and participate in intervisitations within the group. First year teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 New Teacher Mentors; Administrators New teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers All new teachers will receive Live Coaching support from an administrator. New teachers Oct 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All new teachers will be supported by the Parent Coordinator as they develop systems for maintaining communication with parents and relationships with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Human Resources include per session for new teacher mentors; time from administrators to meet with mentors and to offer differentiated PD; support from TDEC, Ms. Mejias in the form of supplemental PD; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All new teachers will participate in a Mid-Year Conference that includes reviewing teaching progress based on Advance ratings and anecdotal experience. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured with Advance ratings and reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve x critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 school year was the first year that our administrative team formed. While we saw an increase in the effective leadership scores on the Learning Environment Survey there are still many areas to further strengthen our leadership skills. In 2018-2019 there will be deliberate leadership development between the principal and the assistant principals, and the assistant principals and teacher leaders. We will use our new partnerships with Affinity Field Support Center, Urban Assembly and others. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  By June 2019, leadership among administrators and teacher leaders will improve as a result of direct leadership development and participation in leadership professional learning communities; this will be evidenced in an increase of at least .5 in the Effective Leadership section of the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Cabinet meetings will be led by different administrators depending on the three areas (culture, instruction, organization). Assistant Principals Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs Assistant Principals will meet one-on-one with the Principal to discuss leadership development and progress towards leadership goals. Teacher Leaders will meet one on one with administration (Dept. Leads with AP, mentors with AP, Peer Collaborative Teacher with Principal, RJ Coordinator with AP). Assistant Principals Sept 2018 - June 2019 Prinicpal , APs Teacher Leaders Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs Teacher Leaders will participate in various professional learning forums and workshops offered by our partners in the DOE, in Urban Assembly and other partners. Teacher Leaders Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and teacher leaders and partner organizations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be engaged directly by administrators and teacher leaders in their individual roles with various programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources include time for outside professional learning, per session for participation in professional learning outside of school hours, per diem substitute teachers (when necessary), time for one-on-one meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will utilize the 2017-2018 Effective Leadership scores on the Learning Environment Survey as baseline data. We will use surveys and the mid-year conference for progress monitoring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess progress using the three school survey reports administered throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018 we had a few academic celebrations that involved parents including a job search workshop series, college workshop and a painting event for families. While some of these had modest attendance, we wanted to organize such a variety of ways that might engage and interest parents. In 2018-2019 we want to have more regular celebratory events that include parents that meld our focus on academic achievement with parent and family involvement. We believe that celebratory events that showcase student achievement and progress will not only bring in more parents to be more involved in their child’s progress but also be a source of pride for both students and families. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students and families will participate in an increased number of celebratory events connected to academic and art accomplishments as a result of strategic planning and recruitment as evidenced by a public calendar and attendance records. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and teacher leaders, in collaboration with the School Culture Team, will create at least four events during the year that celebrate students’ academic and/or artistic accomplishments. Families and teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, teacher leaders, School Culture Team (including Parent Coordinator) Parent Coordinator sends home a weekly newsletter, Parent Blast, every Tuesday. Families and teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and parent coordinator A new website will be developed and updated regularly. Families and teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and parent coordinator Creative Connections will run art-based family workshops at least eight times during this year. Families and teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and partner organizations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have a partnership with Creative Connections which will run a series of art-based family workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Material Resources include art supplies for art-based family workshops (canvas, paints, etc.); food for events and metrocards for parents who attend. Human Resources include art instructor from Creative Connections and administrator present. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our weekly newsletters, the Parent Blast, will be one way of monitoring the creation and execution of the four school-wide, celebratory events and eight art-based family workshops. Sign in sheets and photographs will also serve to help monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sign-in sheets will be used to monitor the number of attendees. Parent Blasts will be used to monitor the creation of celebratory and arts-based events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 9th and 10th grade students scoring in lowest third school-wide on the DRP; students who are scoring at a level 1 on argument writing rubric Students who, after two semesters of Algebra, have not achieve college-ready score on the Regents. Students who, after two semesters of Living Environment, have not achieve college-ready score on the Regents. Students who are scoring at a level 1 on argument writing rubric Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Rewards Literacy intervention; in class support on the argument writing process Reteaching, reading strategies, vocabulary development, problem solving strategies Reteaching, reading strategies, vocabulary development, problem solving strategies Reteaching, reading strategies, vocabulary development, reading strategies Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Rewards is a small group, targeted, research-based program; in class support also occurs in small groups or one-on-one Small group and one-to-one. Small group and one-to-one. Small group and one-to-one. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are at least one grade level behind as well as students at-risk due to poor attendance Individual counseling, group counseling, parental outreach, academic counseling, referrals One–to-one, small group, whole classroom When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Rewards and writing supports will take place during the school day During school; additional supports in December and May after school and on Saturdays During school; additional supports in December and May after school and on Saturdays During school; additional supports in December and May after school and on Saturdays Throughout the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Students in Temporary Housing - 78 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In 2018-2019 we have a social worker dedicated to providing support and outreach to students in temporary housing. This social worker checks in with students at least once a week and uncovers unique and basic needs that the school can provide including supplies (books, writing tools, calculators, book bags) as well as access to support services. The social worker also coordinates communication between the families, the students and the teachers who may need to allow for some flexibility due to the student's housing situation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. For the 2018-2019 school year we employed a variety of recruitment/retention strategies including: 1. 1. Creating a hiring committee with a robust and structured process for interviewing candidates. The process included a demo lesson as well as the submission of sample lesson plans and reference checks. 2. We looked for teachers through teacher education programs as well as Teach For America and the NYC Teaching Fellows. 3. Through professional learning supports we seek to provide teachers with new tools, strategies and approaches for improved pedagogy. This includes establishing a robust New Teacher Orientation series in August. We believe these supports promote retention of strong teachers. 4. We provide teachers with opportunities for improvement and continued learning by encouraging their participation in professional learning in and out of school. We believe this promotes retention of strong teachers. 5. Whenever possible, teaches re given teaching programs that reflect their preferences. Ongoing support and feedback by teacher leaders, administrators and colleagues also supports individual teachers’ growth and likelihood for retention. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning for teachers include department meetings, participation in a school-wide inquiry project and targeted supports related to our instructional focus (see Rigorous Instruction goal). We also provide differentiated professional learning opportunities on different topics (technology, supporting ELLs etc) and geared for teachers in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  different stages of their development. This is especially important as we have 16 teachers new to our school, 11 of whom are new to teaching. For administrators, ongoing professional learning include weekly one-on-one meetings to focus on specific goal and skill development. Administrators, including the principal, also participate in leadership meetings facilitated by Urban Assembly. Our partnerships with Urban Assembly, Affinity and AP for All are also critical to our professional learning structures for our staff including our parent coordinator, college counselor, social workers and teacher leaders. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Regarding assessments, teachers participate in the MOSL committee. Teachers also participate in the analyzing of DRP data which are reviewed in a professional learning environment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  In addition to the inclusion of teacher leaders in our school organizational model, we utilize surveys at the end of each Monday PD session to better understand the diverse needs of our teaching staff. Teachers are also active participants in various committees that play an important role in the school; committees include attendance committee, school culture committee, PD committee (consisting of teacher leaders) and consultation committee. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 0 Sections 5A (4b), BD, E, 4bPage 11, 12, 15 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E section 4bConceptually ConsolidatedPages 11, 12, 15 0 5A, 4b 0 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 373,687.00 108,796.00 0 12,366.00 0 x x x x x x 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  3,465,564 x Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E section 4b Conceptually Consolidated 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School of Arts and Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School of Arts and Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● ensuring that the parent coordinator is bilingual ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● creating a website that is updated regularly with important information for students and families. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School of Arts and Technology in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  HS of Arts & Technology School – Parent/ Family Compact 2018 – 2019 School Responsibilities: The HS of Arts & Technology will: ® Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables your child to meet the state’s student academic achievement standards. ® Provide parents with information about upcoming events via Parent Blasts and the website, www.hsartstech.org . ® Hold parent-teacher conferences. Specific dates and times will be indicated on Parent Blasts. You can also access this information on our website. ® Provide families with frequent reports on their children’s progress through Jupiter Grades, phone calls and emails. ® Provide families with reasonable access to staff. ® Provide a safe learning environment free from distraction. ® Provide access to appropriate intervention services such as counseling. ® Provide high school students with the resources they need to apply to college. This includes, but is not limited to, school college trips, access to a college counselor, meetings with college reps., and assistance with completing college essays and financial aid forms. Family Responsibilities: We, as parents/guardians, will support our child’s learning in the following ways: School Involvement:  Participate in decisions relating to your child’s education. This includes meeting with teachers when asked.  Build positive relationships with teachers and staff. This includes using respectful language when speaking  with teachers and staff. Stay informed about your child’s education by reading all notices/reports from the school or the school district and responding if necessary. This includes checking for the Parent Blast which is posted online every Tuesday. Inform the school of any matters that might affect your child’s academic success.   Regularly check Jupiter Grades. Attendance and Travel:  Ensure that your child attends school daily and on time.  Reinforce Arts & Tech’s commitment to academic excellence by not scheduling family vacations or trips on scheduled school days. Please limit these trips to scheduled school breaks.  Understand that lateness can have a negative impact your child’s grades. Arriving late disrupts class and impacts his/her teachers and classmates. Please make sure your daughter leaves home on time to arrive by 8:00am.  Understand that any student who misses more than 3 consecutive days is expected to return with medical documentation and that any situation in which a student is absent for a substantial number of days will be closely monitored and examined. If your child misplaces his/her metro card s/he must sign up for a replacement with his/her homeroom teacher. Replacement metro cards will be distributed on Tuesdays and Thursdays.  Homework & Academic Success: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47   Ensure that your child completes his/her homework on time and help your child study for tests and quizzes.  Ensure that non-school related computer/phone use do not get in the way of your child’s academic success.  Ensure that your child receives an ample amount of sleep and reads for at least 30 minutes every night.  Encourage your child to participate in after school activities and clubs.  Ensure that your child understands the scanning policy of the MLK campus and the phone collection policy of the MLK campus. All phones will be collected upon entering the building and returned at the end of each day. Social Media: Parents are expected to speak with their child about the appropriate use of social media. This is to ensure that conflicts are not started via social media and that students understand that what they post today can affect them in the future. Please note that students can face disciplinary action for things that they write or post on social media, private messages, or via text.  Ensure that your child “THINK”s before s/he posts. Is his/her post Thoughtful, Helpful, Inspiring, Necessary & Kind.  Ensure that your child is using social media appropriately. Students should refrain from using profanity, slurs, encouraging violence, bullying, using derogatory or threatening language, posting pictures of other students, “liking” or “sharing” statuses that are harmful or inappropriate, or posting videos of others without their consent.  Ensure that parents, guardians, family members and siblings do not get involved in student conflicts online. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The High School of Art and Technology is a high school with 542 students from grade 9 through grade 12. The school population comprises 31% Black, 61% Hispanic, 3% White, and 4% Asian students. The student body includes 11% English language learners and 24% special education students. Boys account for 68% of the students enrolled and girls account for 32%. This school year, we have partnered with Urban Assembly which will provide much needed support in the implementation of our school-wide instructional goals: Closed-Reading and Argumentative Writing skills. Rationale:Rationale: Non-speaking target ELL language beginners through advanced levels are targeted from the ELL students. The vast majority of our students are advanced (53%). One to two years ELL students only comprise 29% of our student body; three to four years ELL Students only comprise 21% of our student body. Long term ELLs comprise 48% of our student body. The English class will mainly target the students at the Advanced level who still need to pass the English Regents. For the Living Environment, 48 students were scheduled to take last June Regents. Out of the 48, only 27 took the Regents with a 19% passing score. The rest of the students were absent. The purpose of Title III is to supplement and improve the class instruction in English and Living Environment. Both the ESL teacher and English teachers have analyzed the June Regents (June 2018) for ELLs and have noticed that the students were not successful mainly in the short answer questions (26, 27 and 28) as well as in the essay. The ESL teacher will concentrate in closed-reading and argumentative writing skills which are two of our school instructional focus for the year school year 2018-19. For this, the teacher will implement the closed-reading strategies to help the students make sense of what they read. The teacher will use graphic organizers to help the students put their ideas and thoughts together. The teacher will use supplemental materials to help the students analyze literary devices as well as to how provide evidence from the text to support their analysis. Again, the students to be targeted are those students who are in their third, fourth and fifth years of their high school career. For Living Environment we will target those students who were scheduled to take last June Regents, but were not successful. The teacher is in the process of completing the June Regents analysis to determine what area in the test represented the biggest challenges for the students. Thereafter, the teacher will focus instructions on the topics the students had the most challenge. For this, the teacher will also implement the closed-reading strategies to assist the students understand and comprehend what they are reading so they can apply it in class. The teacher will include graphic organizers and visuals to help the students make connections as well as determining what is important. There will be two groups of students. from 2:30-3:30 the ESL teacher will target the students for English instruction while the other teacher will delivery Living Environment instruction. From 3:30-4:30 the teachers swap the group of students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Even thought the Title III will target students in their 3 rd , 4 th an 5 th year of their high school career, it will be offered to all ELLs given the fact that our ESL population is small. 10 Seniors will be targeted for this school year. The program will take place two days per week-Wednesdays and Thursday-from 2:30 through 4:30 pm for 20 weeks. They will be serviced by one Bilingual Science and one ESL teacher. These are the pedagogical instructors for the program. There will be two small groups of 20-25 students in grades 11-12 mainly. These activities target the low literacy students in the ESL general population of the school. We will use NYSESLAT, the Living Environment and ELA June Regents scores to have a better idea of what students beside 11th and 12th graders need the service. These students will be heavily recruited in the second week of September and we will attempt to keep them in both the Fall and Spring classes to help them develop the skills they need to become successful students. The teaching time is from 2:30 through 4:30 pm twice per week (Wednesdays and Thursdays). And administrative time is from 3:00-4:30 PM twice per week. The program starts from October 12, 2018 through May 17, 2019. One Certified Living Environment with a Bilingual Extension and one Certified ESL teachers are the 2 instructors for the program. English will be the language of instruction; both instructors also speak Spanish to assist those students who speak Spanish which are the majority of our ELLs. Materials needed for this program: chart paper, graphic organizers, markers, notebooks, pencils and pens, dry erasers and mailing materials such as stamps, envelops, Fiction and Non-Fiction supplemental reading materials such Cold of the While, Scarlet Letter, Oliver Twist, Alexander the Great, King Arthur and the Knights of the Rounder Table, American Life, Gandhi, and Weather Watch Kit. The Language of instruction will be English. Spanish, French translated materials will be available for those French Speaking students. The students will be provided with Glossary, word-to-word dictionary and verbal translation in their native language when applicable. There will be 20 weeks of instruction and two sessions per week for English and two sessions per week for Living Environment. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Usually ESL and Bilingual teachers are often excluded and left with little support when it comes to assist them to plan high quality instructions for ELLs. It is important that teachers teaching ELLs are kept informed of new teaching tools available to better serve the needs of our ELLs. Therefore, the two teachers serving the Title III program will receive training in a sequences of Professional Development presented by The Division of English Language Learners & Students Support Also, teachers will be recommended to other Professional Development Sessions as new professional sessions become available from the English Office Learners. Provider: 2018 Language Series: Multiple Pathways to Learning in the Age of Accountability Date: October 27, 2018 Bank Street College of Education’s 19th Annual Language Series will take place on October 27, 2018 featuring keynote speaker Dr. Nancy Cloud 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part C: Professional Development followed by the choice of two rounds of workshops. The 2018 Language Series will explore teaching methods designed to support educators who are seeking to enhance their practice in spite of prevailing, one-dimensional accountability pressures. It will focus on student engagement in both language and content development through multiple pathways: music, project based learning, multimodal literacy, and others. In addition, since we have a new ESL teacher, we will continue our Book Study Group on a rotation basis: Book Titled: The Literacy Cookbook, Teach Like a Champion, Making Thinking Visible, Mindset and Challenging Learning Through Feedback. Provider: Leah Grabebelsky, Assistant Principal and Benny Urena, Assistant Principal- ESL and Humanities. during Common Planning Time Monday-Friday from 11:58-12:40 and on Mondays professional development day from 2:30 3:40 PM-No cost to program Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We understand that many our ELL parents may not know our educational system and the resources available to them and their children. We also know that most of our students' parents do not live close to our school and that many of them have to travel from the other boroughs; therefore, it is very important to know what is the best time, day and date they can travel to our school. In order to determine their interests, we are in the process of conducting a parent survey in which we ask parents to indicate which days of the week they are available to visit us. Schedule and Duration: September 19 February 13, and April 17, 2018-19 From 5-6 PM. Topics to be covered: 1. College Process specifically designed for ELL Parents for students in 11 and 12 grades. 2. High School Requirements specifically designed for ELL Parents for Students in 9 and 10 grades. 3. Training in Skedula to help parents monitor their child's daily progress. 4. Assessments: Common Core Learning Standards/Career and College Ready. What does it mean to an ELL Student? Provider: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Benny Urena, Assistant Principal Patty Salcedo, Parent Coordinator Urban Assembly Cynthia Jun, Guidance Counselor-Careers and College Readiness (12th grade) How parents will be notified: All written and verbal communications will be provided in Spanish, Haitian Creole and French. There are staff members within the school that can offer this service to parents. For the low incident language, we will request a translator for the day of the activities from the Office of Translation Services. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The High School for Arts and Technology Borough Manhattan School Number 494 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mariela Graham Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Karen Pardi Teacher/Subject Area Oscar Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area Gricelda Nunez Related-Service Provider Maria Broughton Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Benny Urena Coach School Counselor Cynthia Jung Parent Scherisse Duckett Parent Coordinator Roy Balgobin Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 545 Total number of ELLs 58 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.64% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 N/A 10 N/A 11 N/A 12 N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the school years encompassing 2016-17 we assessed the students through the Reading Plus Program as well as our teacher’s baseline assessments (in each one of the core subjects) at the beginning of each term. These assessments give us a snapshot of the reading comprehension level of our students, the skills they have already mastered, and those areas that need to be addressed in the curricula. Formative assessments mainly used to guide our instructional planning are: Midterm and Final exams-used as Benchmarks- as well as the Regents and NYSESLAT results.This data demonstates that ENL students continue to struggle in reading comprehension and writing skills. To address these two challenges, the instructional focus for this school year is based in having ENL students write at least one argumentative essay in all core subjects. As a result, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  teachers across all subjects area incorporate in their daily lesson plannings graphic organizer, sentence/phrase starters, conferencing, one-on-one and/or small group instructions and reading with a purpose strategies. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support the effort of improving student outcomes, the teachers have been scheduled to meeting daily during Common Planning Time (CPT). The teachers also meet on Mondays and Tuesdays after school as well as during the students’ lunch period. Data is disseminated during CPT, One-on-one prep and post informal and formal observations, after school 90 minutes Professional development sessions. Finally, at the end of each Marking Period for a scholaship report meetings with indivdivual teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? There are four benchmark assessments administered to students throughout the school year: uniform Midterm and Final Exams both in the Fall and Spring semesters These benchmark assessments are performed in all subject areas and they are used to measure students progress in language acquisition as well as content. There are three major areas of needs for the ENL population: Gaining sufficient vocabulary in the English language to understand what they read as well as developing their reading and writing language skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered and analyzed, the teachers are required to submit an intervention plan. The work is completed during CPT as well as after school in which the teachers receive per session. Teachers are also provided time on Tuesdays. Based on the Summative assessments, teachers meet during CPT to make adjustments on the Curricula as well as to their lesson plannings. We offered after school tutoring via the T3 program as well as Saturday School especially for those ENL students in Cohort T. This information is usually disseminated through one-on-one meetings with teachers, formal and informal classroom observations and walkthrough. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessment data that is used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs are BETA Version, from the ELL DATA Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS. We also used the on-track and off-track progress to graduation. Based on the NYSESLAT, we determine how many classes need to be crated by their students' levels, classes where ther ENL teachers will be pushing in and amount of minutes required as mandated by the CR-154. The Regents data gives us a clear understanding in which areas teachers need to focus the most when planning the curricula, lesson planning, grouping and how much differentiation as well as scaffold needs to take place in the classrooms to address the needs of ENL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This information is disseminated to teachers throughout the school year, especially in September during the Monday professional development sessions after school as well as during CPT. Depending on how the students perform in the NYSESLAt and/or Regents, program is adjusted to meet the needs of all ENL students. There are times, when the English course is double to help the students prepare for the ELA Regents examination. Adjustments are made when it is needed and when students' transcripts have been properly reviewed by the College Advisor, Assistant Principal, Programmer and Principal as well as with parents and students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in the freestanding ESL program at Arts and Technology High School are in push-in ESL classes model. Students receive mandated minutes based on their proficiency levels. Freestanding, push-in ESL classes are heterogeneous as there are students with mixed levels within the classes. Students receive ESL classes based on their mandated minutes per the CR Part 154. The push-in model is integrated in all ELA courses, depending on the ELA level of the students. For this to happen, we have hired a second ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering receive 540 integrated ENL instruction in ELA classes; Emerging receives 360 integrated ENL instruction in ELA classes. Transitioning receives 180 integrated instruction in ELA classes. Expanding receives 180 integrated instruction in ELA classes. Finally, Commanding receives 90 integrated instruction in ELA classes. . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instruction for ELLs is delivered in English throughout their day in all core subjects. Within the ESL push-in model in the ELA classrooms, both the ENL and ELA teachers planned the classroom instructions according to the needs of the students. The ELL teacher uses several instructional materials that include, but are not limited to: Seven Habits of Effective Readers, Annotate, Graphic organizer, Sentence/phrase starters, purposely grouping, think-pair-share, visual aids and content glossaries printed in the in available languages:Spanish, French, Russian, Bengali, Arabic. Dictionaries are available in the classrooms as well. A big emphasis is put on in developing student vocabulary acquisition especially in Global Studies and Science. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We are fortunate to have a Spanish speaking faculty members who can evaluate students. In the instance that we have a student who speaks a language that our school cannot support, we seek out help from outside sources and from within the DOE.All ELL students are offered Regents in their native language when available. All ELLs and former ELLs are given bilingual glossaries for all exams. We are purchasing content area textbooks (Spanish) that are aligned to the English version so that the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  students can read both versions. The students also have access to the computer lab which is open during and after school for them to conduct research within their native language to complete projects. Teachers in the content areas often provide the students with translation versions of the topic being studied in class. In the classroom, the students are paired with peers who speak the same language so they can assist in translation and work collaboratively. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction in ESL classes is differentiated by our certified ESL teachers. The following strategies are used in the ESL classroom by teachers:As teachers differentiate their instruction, they must consider the multiple levels of learners within the classroom. Several instructional materials are used and lessons are planned to ensure information is delivered in a variety of ways. Through the use of oral and written demonstrations and tangible objects, teachers are able to ensure that all learners’ needs are met. A. Support structures in place for our SIFE ESL students are listed below:Instruction:• Interactive computer programs• Beginning level texts and materials• Focus on Academic and Content vocabularyAcademic Intervention Support: • Students receive additional help and instruction to assist with understanding of content area materials by infusing visual aids to assist them make connections and determine importance.• ELL teachers and content area teachers provide additional instruction if necessary in small groups and/or conferencing• Students are assisted with homework and test preparation on Tuesdays and throughout the week for the Extra curricular activities. Saturday School:• Students work closely with a content area teacher and ELL teacher to strengthen skills in the content area and improve content vocabulary and/or in the after school Tittle III Program.B. Instructional Support that is in place of our newcomer students:Newcomer students are heterogeneously programmed for 540 minutes of instructions a week. The remainder of the day is full immersion in English-speaking classrooms. Through immersion, students acquire language more quickly. These students are paired with peers who speak the same language to assist in the development of the English language. In addition, Entering students are provided with different teaching strategies to help them make connections with what is being said in class and what they are reading. This take place through modeling, leveled materials, dictionaries, glossaries, building schema products, and rubrics. Teachers use colors and highlighting and pictures that capture the meaning of unknown words. The students are provided with verbal as well as written directions. C. Instruction for Developing Students: These students are provided with connecting and transitional words to improve in their writings. Instructions is differentiated by providing the students more choices that capitalize on their interests. Provide them with some flexibility in the way they use time. Teachers includes models and exemplars with the a guidelines and assigning responsibility to the students. Teachers bring videos, songs. D. Instruction for Long term ENL students: These group of students are provided with rubrics for them to self and peer evaluate their work. The teachers include graphic organizers and templates to assist them brainstorms their ideas. Strong emphasis is put on the students citing strong evidence to support their claims as they write their argumentative essays. This skills they learn in the ELA class, are expected to be transferred to the content areas as they proceed to write their argumentative essays. They are provided with checklist to assess their academic progress daily. E. Former ENL Students: As these students continue writing and speak a proficient level, they need more emphasis on how to discriminate what is reliable and non-reliable sources. The students are more instructed to annotate and cite concrete evidence and properly citing those sources such as citing page numbers, lines, quotation marks. The students are provided with quotes to be engaged in critical thinking decisions as well as making choices that would affect and/or benefit the world as a whole. I 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The materials the teachers use for ELL-SWD students which assist in making the academic content areas and accelerate English language development are:1. In ELA, the school uses the Collections Curriculum. In order to help the students understand what is being read in class, the teachers front load the vocabulary words that will be seen in the lesson. To have ease access to the language, the students are provided with sentence starts and graphic organizers to brainstorm their ideas. The teachers implement the I do, We do and You do teaching strategy to help the students demonstrate mastery of the lesson. Often, there are three teachers in the classsroom: The General ELA, the ENL and the SWD teachers which take turns to assist the students one-on-one and regrouping. The Collection Curriculum brings with it video, voice reading, sample of how to annotate, highlight important idea as well as helping the students identify mean ideas. 2. In the Math, we use the Carnigie Learning Curriculum This curriculum offers the students sufficient practice. The teachers enhance the curriculum with other outside resources to make the math problem more real-world problem solving activity. Promethean boards are found in all the classrooms which the teachers fully use to deliver a more interactive learning for the students. 3. In Science-Lab Kits were purchased for the students as well as different types of rocks. Textbooks are purchased both in Spanish and English for those students who Speak Spanish as this the language that the majority our ENL students speak. Glosaries are provided in the languages present in our school for students to consult when needed. 4. In Global Studies the students receive text both in the original version as well as in simplied one to assist them grasp the most important aspect of the subject. Time tables often present and displayed in the classroom. Glossaries are available in the classrooms to help the students find key terms in the subject. Teachers use a variety of teaching strategies, I do, We do, You do, Accountable Talk, Seven 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For our ELL and SWD populations, we have great flexibility in choosing curriculum and modifying instruction. Teachers meet on a daily basis and are working towards creating curriculum that meets the needs of our diverse population. As we move towards a more project-based school, ELL and SWD have more opportunities for success on assessments. These projects will offer students the opportunity to acquire content knowledge creatively. Student work is constantly evaluated and quality feedback is given to students. Patterns in instructional needs are used to inform instruction and make curricular decisions. Teachers plan scaffolded lessons for ELLs in content classes; i.e. history, math and science. All teachers have common planning time and direct PD is delivered to all teachers with regard to ELLs. All classes are heterogeneously mixed and include ELLs, SWD, and Gen.Ed. students. Teachers are trained on SESIS so that they can access student's IEP and read the Plot where the student's IEP goal(s) is recorded. Once they review this data, the teachers planned UDL lessons to address the necessary IEP goal(s). SETSS classes are skill-based classes that further assist the students in meeting their IEP goal. Based on what is indicated in the IEP, the student's schedule is adjusted to help the students reach the set IEP goal(s). 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program takes place first in the classroom after teachers analyze the data from classroom formative and Summative assessments (benchmark exams). Intervention plan is then submitted along with analyzed data. The students received tutoring during student lunch period and after school hours (Tuesday-Friday) from 2:20-4:00 PM in all subjects, especially in ELA and math. Saturday school is also available for ELLs to receive assistance in weakness areas. Teachers meet with a supervisor to go over the scholarship report distributed 6 times within the school year. Scholarship report is carefully 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  reviewed in all content areas, especially in Math and ELA. If there is a need, the teachers provide the students with a more individualize plan creating skill-based folders. The teachers enter students weekly progress in SKEDULA. Other interventions: 1. Teacher-Student Meeting 2. Guidance Counselor-Student Meeting 3. Parent, Student, Guidance Counselor, Administration meeting 4. Tutoring during and after school 5. Saturday School. . 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data gathered and trends, our teachers will develop interdisciplinary units across curricula, especially in the Humanities. Those interdisciplinary units will concentrate in reinforcing reading and writing skills in ELA and other core subjects. The ENL students now are in a push-in model in which two teachers are in the class to better serve the ENL population. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students participate in all after school programs including Saturday School, Trips (Frost Valley, Great Adventure, Parks, zoos, Museums). Translation is provided for those students with limited language proficiency so that they know what is going on in our school on a daily basis. The students participate in after school supplemental services such as tutoring and clubs. The ENL students as well as their parents are informed of these school programs by: Weekly Parent Newsletters are provided to students and parents, daily morning announcements, administration lunch duty, assemblies, flat screen TV daily announcement display, one-on-one meeting with students 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We continue purchasing classroom mini-library reading materials at different levels to support our ELL students in receiving core content reading in the ESL classes so that the ESL teacher supports core content within the lesson. In addition, we completed our Shining Star full selections so that the students engage in core content reading materials as they gain language proficiency. We provide dictionaries and content glossaries in Spanish, French, Bengali, Arabic, and Chinese. For those low incident languages, we seek the assistance of DOE personnel for translation of materials if necessary. We will purchase licensing to continue our reading program initiative, the Reading Plus program. All classrooms are equipment with the latest technology (Promethean Boards). All the classrooms are equipped with Promethean boards allowing the teachers to present video clips, visual aids, and modeling for the students. The are laptop carts for the students to use in class, especially to conduct research and/or to work on individualize assignments. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in ENL by registering students in Spanish classes since this is higher percent of our ELL populations. The Glossaries in the content areas are in the student's target language. All communications-verbal and written- provided to the parents and students are sent in the student's home language. We use the HLS to disseminate school information both written and verbal. During one-on-one parent visits, Curriculum Night and Parent-teacher conferences, we talk to parents about what is the best way to communicate with them (phone, written) and what is their preferred language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  The assistant principal of supervision makes sure that all ELL students receive the mandated required services, such as the number of periods and hours of ESL instructions, testing accommodations and translated materials when available in their native language. For low incident languages we hire DOE approved translators or interpreters. We have content glossaries and dictionaries to assist all our ELL students in different grade levels. All materials are evaluated by teachers and administrators to make sure they are ages and grade levels appropriated. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares the school cafeteria, physical education, library, and nurse facilities with five other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are three Open House fairs at our school before new students are enrolled in our school. During these fairs, the parents are informed, in their native language, of the school expectations and policies as well as the rights they have as parents of ELLs. ELL students also participate in these fairs. In addition, there are grade assemblies throughout the school year. The first one takes place during the first week in the school year. In these assemblies guidance counselors and the parent coordinator, along with the assistant principals and the principal, gather in the school auditorium to guide all ELL students where to go if they have concerns or questions as well as the services available to them in our school. During these assemblies we talk about high school graduation requirements in each of the grades and promotion criteria, student contract expectations and policies, lateness, absenteeism, after school programs, and traveling from the physical education room to the science labs and cafeteria to our floor. We also pair new ELL students with students already in our school so they can help their classmates navigate our campus.These events are coordinated and conducted by: School Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS and Administrators. Newly enrolled students to the DOE along with their parents are welcomed by the parent coordinator. Thereafter, they are interviewed by the Assistant Principal and a guided tour is provided. Usually, we introduce the student to a peer who will help the newly student to acclimate him/herself to schooling in the United States, especially in New York City. The Assistant Principal often chat with the students in the hallways, cafeteria and in the after school program to check in. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for teachers of ELLs is facilitated at a school-wide level. There is a School Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Committee in place who, along with the UFT representative, the Principal and teachers, have decided on the topics they need to further develop their teaching craft. There are 90 minutes allocated for professional development workshops which take place on Mondays from 2:20 to 3:40 PM. In addition, each department meets individually with the ELL Team to discuss professional development topics related to instruction and testing modification, and teachers receive memos which identify ELLs and testing modifications during Common Planning Time (CPP). Also, the assistant principal of supervision meets each department to discuss the alignment of their curriculum with Common Core, and Danielson Frameworks. All teachers have common planning time every day. Teacher teams address and plan instruction targeted for special populations such as ELLs and SWD. All teachers are engaged in the School Professional Development Plan for the school year. In addition, teachers are strongly encouraged to attend professional development workshops organized by the UFT, regional and out-of-state, according to their individual needs. Professional developments are all targeted for teachers to make adjustments and align their curricula to the CCLS.All personnel academic and non-academic participate in School Retreat in which ELL services and compliance are addressed along with the meetings planned throughout the school year. Professional Development sessions for ENL teachers:Writing is Thinking Strategic Inquiry (WITsi) series – (NYU location TBD) •October 20, 2017 •November 17, 2017 •December 15, 2017 •January 19, 2018 Times for all sessions 8:30 am – 2:30 pm 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide additional professional development opportunities to further develop pedagogical skills of staff who work with the ELL students. Teachers also attend professional developments offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Twice a month, teachers receive emails from the assistant principal of supervision informing them of these opportunities, especially professional developments targeting ELA and math. Records of agenda and attendance are kept in the AP’s Office in a Binder. School tracked teacher's required 15% hours. Writing is Thinking Strategic Inquiry (WITsi) series – (NYU location TBD) •ctober 20, 2017 •ovember 17, 2017 •December 15, 2017 •January 19, 2018 Times for all sessions 8:30 am – 2:30 pm In addition, the ENL teachers receive professional development sessions in the School-wide Professional Development Yearly Planned which target specific areas of improvement based on formal and informal classroom observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We are a single session school; therefore, there are 75 minutes allocated to contact parents in writing, through phone calls and/or have them visit our school to keep parents up-to-date on their child's academic and non-academic progress. During these 75 minute sessions, we have created a team comprised of the child's teachers, guidance counselor, assistant principal (if necessary), school social worker, psychologist, and parents to review student records, language acquisition, assessments in all content areas, and to assess the challenges the student is having so that a Student Intervention Plan is developed with realistic next steps. School personnel will be available to translate for the parents. For those low incident languages, a translator will be contacted from the DOE website. Parents are also invited to our Curriculum Night/Parent Night where they follow their child's daily schedule. This way, they know the school’s expectations and policies in regard to Curricula and the new Common Core Standards. The guidance counselors scheduled one-on-one conferences with parents four times within the school year to address graduation requirements and student performance. There were multiple assemblies throughout the school year scheduled, by grade, to address graduation requirements. Based on the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents, we engaged parents and the child in a coversation about language challenges and where the child is having the most difficulty. During this one-on-one meeting, we recommend parents and child the best way to continue improving in the verbal, reading and written skills such assigning TV programs, Music and video to practice their listening and phonetics. In the classroom, teachers are recommended to plan activities in which the students are to speak and practice their phonetics. For the Summer vacation, the students receive a leveled reading list along with reading assignments. Appointments are made for one-on-one meetings with the student's guidance counselor to review student annual academic and language acquisition. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parents are invited to all our school performances, such as Talent Show, Pot Luck party, Honor Roll celebration, Perfect Attendance Awards evening, and PTA meeting. This year we had the first ELL parent to serve as a member of the School Leadership Team. Parents are also invited to participate in our annual school trips programmed every year by grade levels. For example, all 9th graders go on a 3-day trip to upstate New York to Frost Valley, the 10th graders go to Great Adventure, and so on. Parents are invited as chaperons. Parents are also invited to participate in the SLT (School Leadership Team) classroom walkthrough to observe classes. Thereafter, teams gather to debrief and provide administration and teachers with recommendations if needed. We have parents participate in the College Crunch Nigh, first ever event at the school as well as transcript night. These parent involvement activities have been coordinated after reviewing the last year QR, Parent-Survey. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Core Reading Program for ELLs For the 61 ELL students, a specialized reading program was presented to them. Reading Plus is a Common Core aligned reading intervention that prepares students to engage with complex text by developing the three key dimensions of successful reading: capacity, efficiency, and motivation. The program is personalized and adjusted dynamically to increase reading achievement for ELL students. Dynamic text presentations make reading easier and more efficient, while developing stamina and increasing rate and enjoyment. The program tracks student interests and uses this data to facilitate content area connections, broaden curiosity, and develop intrinsic motivation and knowledge. Structured text-dependent comprehension and writing tasks develop academic vocabulary and foster increased capacity with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  progressively complex texts. Assessments: 4 domains An initial insight assessment is given that measures students’ motivation for reading. It assesses four domains: extrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, value for reading, and interest. The second part evaluates student vocabulary knowledge. Students view a target word and choose the word or phrase that most closely matches the meaning of the target word. Based on their performance, students may be presented with easier or more difficult vocabulary items to determine the highest level at which they can successfully and consistently demonstrate vocabulary knowledge. The third part assesses the students’ silent reading comprehension capacity. Students read several passages of varying text complexity to determine the highest level at which they are able to demonstrate comprehension. Students read these passages in an independent format so their comprehension-based silent reading rates can be measured accurately. Each assessment passage is followed by rigorously crafted questions to monitor student comprehension performance. Based on their comprehension performance with each passage, students may be presented with easier or more difficult texts. ELLs and Students with disabilities: ELL students who participated in Reading Plus made significantly greater gains compared to non-participating and non-compliant students. The students were given laptops two days per week and used the program. Lower-performing students and newcomers used the program for 90 minutes per day, or 2 periods. Students felt empowered because they enjoyed using the laptops, and having a silent and independent reading time. The students were engaged in a core reading program with structured independent reading practice to enhance silent reading proficiency. Empowering ELL students supports the goal of raising student achievement for all students. In addition, the data provided by the Reading Plus assessments gives ESL and special education teachers customization options that offer flexibility in developing intensive individualized instructional paths. Each student has an instructional summary report that summarizes the skills he or she has mastered and the targeted areas that need improvement. Additional offline skill worksheets which clarify these core skill areas are given to the student according to his or her differentiated needs, to support further achievement. Teachers are able to build lesson plans reinforcing these skills using the targeted data provided. The core reading program helps ELL students and students with special needs develop necessary foundational skills at their own pace. Data: 61 students actively using the Reading Plus program. 31 students completed 21+ reading lessons. 61 students took the InSight Initial Assessment benchmark test The average for ELL students in this school: 26 lessons per student Average rate gain: 39 words per minute Average level gain: .6 ( no students are reading at grade level, however, with continued implementation, reading gains can be built upon) 10% students are at/above rate target for word per minute reading rate. It is notable that students who competed at least 41 reading lessons in Reading Plus typically show measurable gains. 16 students who completed at least 41 reading lessons made 1 or more gain in content level closer to their grade target. Students who read 61+ stories: 3 students gained 3 levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mariela Graham, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Arts and Technology School DBN: O3M494 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mariela Graham Benny Urena Roy Balgobin Karen Pardi Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Scherisse Duckett Parent Griselda Nunez Teacher/Subject Area Omar Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Jung Fred Welsh Dorothy Robles Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member MFSC Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 N/A 11/1/17 11/1/17 11/1/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: M03494 School Name: The High School Of Arts and Technol Superintendent: Fred Welsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Roy Balgobin Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The main assessment used in our school to identify limited-English-Proficient Parents is our Home Language Survey as well as ATS Reports and more importantly our Student Emergency Contact Cards. Parent's preferred language for both written and oral communication are Spanish and French as well as Fulani, Bengali, and Chinese, Arabic and Haitian. We also created a report with the languages that the parents speak by class and grade with is updated regularly by Assistant Principal Urena. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Most of the preferred language for both written and oral communications is Spanish but not limited to French, Arabic, Chinese, Fulani, Haitian and Bengali. This has been determined after reviewing our data gathered from HLS, ATS reports and Parent Emergency Cards. African (1) Arabic (11) Bengali (1) Chinese (1) French (14) Fulani (1) Haitian Creole (1) Nepali (1) Russian (1) Spanish (260) 0.13 1.46 1.99 0.13 1.86 0.13 0.13 0 0.27 58.83 0.13 0.13 34.53 0.13 0.13 African (1) Arabic (11) Bengali (1) Chinese (1) French (14) Fulani (1) Haitian Creole (1) Nepali (1) 0.13 1.46 1.73 0 1.86 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.27 58.96 0.13 0.13 34.66 0.13 0.13 Russian (1) Spanish (260) Telugu (1) Telugu (1) Urdu (1) English (443) Urdu (1) English (443) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to All important documents described above are translated in Spanish. Verbal communications during assemblies, parent-teacher conferences (November and March),review of student curriculum, graduation requirements are provided to parents (September) Out-going phone messages are also done in Spanish. This new school year, we will also make morning announcements in both English and Spanish. Families September 2017 October 2017 November 2017 January 2017 April 2017 translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Both Assistant Principal and Principal translate letters and for lager documents such the weekly parent newsletter, we will submit documents to the DOE Translator Services Unit. May 2017 June 2017 August 2017 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In-house translator available and DOE interpretation service September 2017 October 2017 February 2018 December 2017 1. Admission process in interviews-September 2. Open house-March, June and September 3. Curriculum Night-September 4. Celebrating Success Twice in the School year, Fall Semester-September and Spring Semester-April. 5. Parent-Teacher Conferences-November and March 6. Academic Progress/Child Study Team-January and May. 7. College Crunch Night 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Written letters, phone call, animated phone calls, school webpage Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. November School Wide Retreat, Tuesday after school parental outreach meetings, CPT Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  New and over the counter parents of ELL students report to the Main Office in room 387 where they are provided with a packet containing the most important information such Parent Contact form, Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities, Home Language Survey, Conduct, Safety, and Discipline, Interpretation and translation services are provided to parents immediately. For those parents with an appointment requiring interpretation and/or translation services arrangements are made before the parents arrive to us. This is done when the language spoken by the parent is not spoken by any of our school personnel. For example, Bengali and/or Fulani. Therefore, we will call the office for Family Engagement and Advocacy, Translation and Interpretation Unit at 718-752-7373. 90% of the parents of ELLs speak Spanish. Therefore, our school has personnel that are available to translate for the parents at any time. Notification Requirements are posted in the Main office. For written communication, our school look at the Home Language Survey and/or Parent Contact Form to determine which language preference they have listed so that we provide our parents written instructions that they can understand.We will also print notification documents from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet Site listed in Part C. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of each meeting or event, a survey will be distributed and/or mailed to parents to hear their concerns and questions and make adjustment accordingly. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 
