2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M495 School Name: PARK EAST HIGH SCHOOL Principal: KEVIN MCCARTHY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Park East High School 310400011495 9-12 School Number (DBN): 04M495 230 East 105 th Street, New York, NY 10029 212-831-1517 212-348-6097 Phone Number: Fax: Kevin McCarthy Kmccart6@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kevin McCarthy DaianaMuñoz Anthony Galindez Anthony Galindez vacant vacant vacant N/A District Information Geographical District: 04 Superintendent’s Office Address: Donald Conyers Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn, NY 11211 dconyer@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-9235124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7546 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kevin McCarthy DaianaMuñoz Anthony Galindez Lourdes Velez vacant vacant vacant Steven Serling vacant vacant *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AlishaGordon Sophia Fofana Beverly Bartlett Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Park East is to educate all students to be critical thinkers by conducting research, solving complex problems, clearly expressing ideas through writing, providing evidence to support arguments and reading challenging texts. By completing a rigorous curriculum, our students graduate prepared for the challenges of college. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Over the years, we have developed and continued to build on school-wide goals in addition to the expected CEP goals. Our school-wide goals have been shaped and revised by our school mission, the current needs of our students, and new expectations to integrate ideas such as the CCLS and clear instructional foci. Nearly 17 years ago, we embarked on a process to rebuild and restructure—to make a new Park East. Park East was a failing school with no clear mission, no professional culture, and low expectations that resulted in very poor performance that left most students with no preparation for college and careers. In fact, most didn’t even graduate. The process of turning this around required a conscious focus on college preparatory instruction and engaging in an ongoing process of defining and revising goals that would get us there. Our mission statement reflects this process and our new foci and goals. In our classes and through a highly structured advisory system, we help students develop individual and social responsibility by expecting the highest personal and academic standards. Athletics, school-wide activities and traditions at Park East reflect our commitment to being an inclusive, fun-loving and respectful community. Through their educational experiences, Park East students acquire a set of values and a sense of kinship that allows them to realize and reach ambitious goals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Although we serve students at about the same percentage as our peer and district schools, we find that the focus on college preparatory instructional goals for all have benefited our special populations in the same way as our general student population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our current school-wide goals are a result of several years of revisions and building on these goals. This is a process that started with collaboration with our graduates who came back from their college experiences ready to help us to identify and shape our goals based on the ways that we prepared them for college and the ways that we needed to change and respond to their real needs. The current iteration of our school-wide goals serve to focus our work for our special populations but also those students within our student population for whom we must differentiate up. We now serve a broader range of students than we once did and it is clear that they have some different needs to consider. Here are our current goals, which reflect the important areas of focus that build upon prior years' work: Instructional Goals 2018--2019 Rigor ● Research (two big research projects per grade level per year) ● Focus on searching information and sourcing documents ● Incorporating complex texts, sourcing of texts, proper citations of sources ● Use of technology to express understanding ● Construct strong argumentative, evidence-based papers 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Collect, analyze, and extrapolate from data sets Independence ● Independent reading of diverse, complex texts ● Long term HW, day to day HW ● Habits: time management, studying, ability to work in groups, self-advocacy, meta-reflection. Thinking Culture ● Curiosity ● Questioning ● Thinking about sources (how to search, how to source, how to determine the validity of sources) Instructional Foci for 2018-2019: Planning and Preparation for Authentic Learning In the past few years we feel that we have made the most progress in the following elements of the Framework: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Trust . As always, we will continue to focus on and grow in these areas but we will establish goals for the upcoming year on the other elements of the Framework for Great Schools. By developing these school-wide instructional goals and CEP goals that focus on these areas, we have been and will continue to be deliberate about improving outcomes for students and refining instructional practices for teachers. Appropriately the goals guide much of our professional work in our teams and help us to stay focused on groups of students that we have room for improvement with. Our recent successes are motivating to us but there is room for further growth, particularly with sub-groups. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M495 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 406 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 10 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 76.4% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 63.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 85% 95.5% 17.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 92 53 2 93.0% 7.9% 15.0% 25.6% 4.7% 3.7% 4 18% 4.4 N/A N/A 100% 91% 97.9% 26% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The results of our most recent QR and PPO visits as well as our own ongoing self-reflection and analysis indicate that we have made some progress in this area but have room to grow. Of particular importance is consistency across classrooms and alignment both vertically and horizontally. This was indicated in our QR results in the past as an obstacle to being Well Developed. Sustaining our proficiency and success by developing our systems and structures for curriculum development will help us in improving over time. The majority of teachers have engaged in our process of curricular development including a peer review and feedback process. However, there are some teachers for whom there have been inconsistencies in the quality and rigor of some of the curricular products. We addressed this in both grade-level and departmental teams in the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years and we would like to build on that. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in department inquiry teams will collaboratively develop rigorous, common core-aligned, curricular plans including curriculum maps, syllabi, and marking period summative assignments to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the development of (2) two curricular plans. Each part of the curricular plan will be reviewed by peers and administrators using a common rubric in order to qualify as rigorous and CC aligned. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly meetings with department heads will be held throughout the year to review data, create agendas for department meetings and create new policies and procedures to address the needs of the target populations (lowest third). Lowest third in school Weekly department and grade level meetings in coordination with Professional Learning Planning Committee (comprised of teachers, administrators, and coaches) will focus on the needs of students across the spectrum and differentiation practices to incorporate into curriculum plans SWDs and other high need groups Professional Learning Committee completes inquiry work--Peer review and feedback sessions to “tune” components of curriculum plans each marking periods All students will benefit but SWDs and other high need groups will be focus Department heads, AP Instruction, Principal PL Committee, department and grade-level inquiry teams PL Committee Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We plan to engage families and support their understanding of what Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core means in the effort to make families better partners in learning at home. The primary way that we will engage them is through communicating through our online platforms (Google classroom, JupiterEd). This provides us with a way to share expectations, provide access to view, post and respond to assignments, grades, etc. These tools help us to have consistent contact with families and respond to their needs and questions. We are also planning to engage families more broadly in shared celebrations of learning such as our science and math fairs, book talks, talent shows, digital narrative exhibitions and other celebrations of learning throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 14  Staff will be organized by department and grade level to organize inquiry teams in order to implement this plan. The SBO for repurposing time will provide for team work as well. The PL committee will be provided a common planning period in the schedule weekly as well as the Department Heads. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Completion of 1 set of curricular items that have been identified on the rubric as rigorous and common core-aligned, for the first semester of the year by February 2019, will be a good mid-point benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Curricular items completed and stored in GoogleDrive folders. The completion of all components and the peer and administrative review sheets will provide the measure of progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At Park East, we have always believed that the best way to maintain a safe and supportive school environment is to create a community that students want to be a part of. We put a lot of effort into sustaining and continuing to grow our after-school sports, clubs, and activities. We also continue and grow out our school-wide traditions and celebratory events so that we attract and include more students each year. It truly is an "If You Build It, They Will Come" kind of thing. During the previous three school years we continued to build, and the thing that we are most excited about that has been the most impactful is our PBIS work. The major work that we have done with PBIS have been student led and student-centered. Students lead our efforts to be positive and build and grow our community around our PRIDE Council. The Council has helped us to frame our values and match them to behaviors throughout the building by every constituent in our community. Through their work, the tone is set from the beginning of the day when Park East AM Radio plays an uplifting positive musical "request" throughout the building. It starts us off feeling positive and the PRIDE Council DJs always intro and close out the music of the day with a positive message to the whole community. It starts us off on the right foot--feeling focused, positive and together, as a community, we face the day. During advisory time and once a week during daily announcements, the PRIDE Council also reads shout outs to students and staff at the school from their peers and colleagues. Again, it's simple, but the message is clear. We start off positive and stay that way--we support each other and in the end, we are safer, more-focused and doing really well academically too! We know that this is a positive element but we need to feed this and develop it more in the coming year. As our efforts grow, they will provide stability and an opportunity to meet our need for growth in this important area of the Framework. In the 2018-2019 school year, we would like to add dimensions to this work and create new roles for student leaders to compliment the work of the PRIDE Council. In particular, building a cadre of peer counselors and peer mediators is something that we believe could be of great value to our growing, positive, constructive community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our PBIS program will expand efforts to build a positive and inclusive school environment through the collaborative creation with teachers and administrators of student leadership roles--peer counselors, mediators, and Advisory Reprentatives. The development of these roles will result in a development of active participation by a minimum of 3 peer mediators, 3 peer counselors and Advisory Representatives for each advisory in the school. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Refinement of our PRIDE matrix-- a full-value, social contract that was collaboratively developed last year. During PRIDE Council meetings, the matrix will be revised to include feedback from students and staff. Students and staff Planning of school-wide events (e.g. Talent Show--to highlight the positive attributes and talents of our students and staff). The planning of these events would happen at PRIDE Council meetings. Students and staff Nomination/Selection and training of peer counselors and mediators--they will participate in a two-day intensive initial training and then follow-up training throughout the school year in our after-school program. Students and staff Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Advisory representatives, PRIDE Council, Teacher advisors, AP Pupil Personnel Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Advisory representatives, PRIDE Council, Teacher advisors, AP Pupil Personnel Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Advisory representatives, PRIDE Council, Teacher advisors, AP Pupil Personnel 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We plan to engage families and support their understanding of what Supportive means in the effort to communicate with families better. The primary way that we will engage them is through communicating through our online platforms (Parent Newsletter, Google classroom, JupiterEd). This provides us with a way to share information, provide access to view, post and respond to ideas as they grow, etc. These tools help us to have consistent contact with families and respond to their needs and questions. We are also planning to engage families more broadly in student led activities related to the PRIDE Council throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following human resources will be utilized to attain this goal-- all teaching staff in their role as Advisory teachers, the parent coordinator, administrators, paraprofessionals, and aides. We will support the work of building the PRIDE 2018-19 CEP 17  Council and developing the planning of events by providing per session for teachers. Advisory Reps, peer mediators and peer counselors will receive initial training and follow-up training that will be provided by guidance counselors and other trained and experienced teachers and other staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Meeting minutes and plans from PRIDE Council meetings as well as work products from the first semester trainings and meetings should provide nice benchmarks for progress toward this goal. A total of 5 students receiving training and working with a caseload by February 2019 will provide a clear measure of progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting minutes and plans from PRIDE Council meetings as well as work products from the meetings this year, will provide a measure of the progress toward this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At Park East, we believe that we have a well- developed professional community in which teachers are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that have strengthened teacher instructional capacity. In many ways this has resulted in a high level of school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. With nearly half of teachers involved in leadership roles, we have distributed leadership structures that are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. These structures were essential to the turnaround of this school and have become the pathway to our continued improvement. We have teacher-designed and teacher-led professional learning. It has helped us to get buy-in and investment from teachers so that we could make progress and improve outcomes for students. In order to sustain and continue to grow in this area, we need to commit resources and time, particularly for teachers who are new to Park East and our teachers who teach in license areas for which they have no counterpart or partner to plan with (e.g. Earth Science, Art, Spanish). These teachers need to meet for co-planning and professional learning opportunities with other teachers in their discipline area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in discipline-area teams, pairs, or triads will collaboratively develop rigorous, lesson plans and other curricular materials to improve collaboration as measured by the development of at least two curricular items. The successful completion and implementation of these curricular items will be measured by an increase of at least 5% in the Regents or Course passing rates for the courses that these curricular items were developed for. 2018-19 CEP 19 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Department heads, AP Instruction, Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). With the second year of financial support from the Heckscher Foundation for Children, Teachers will participate in inter-visitation, summer co-planning opportunities, and collaborative professional development involving pairs and teams from the East Harlem Pride schools (Park East, Heritage and Central Park East HS). Of particular importance is to provide these opportunities for the specialized content area teachers --teachers in each school that have no peers teaching the same subject/content in their school (e.g. teachers in foreign language, art, chemistry, physics, earth science, etc.). These teachers are always teaching alone with no peers to provide feedback and support and will benefit greatly from funded opportunities to collaborate and co-plan with their counterparts in other schools. Through these opportunities teachers and administrators will have an opportunity to explore, share and build best practices, exchange ideas, and develop curricula and programming elements that fit the needs of each school and which will greatly improve the post-secondary options and outcomes of our collective student enrollment. Regular submission of curricular projects and review of meeting minutes by administrators will provide progress data. Teachers Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Department heads, AP Instruction, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We plan to engage families and support their understanding of what Collaborative Teachers and Strategies means in the effort to make families better partners in learning at home. The primary way that we will engage them is through communicating through our online platforms (Google classroom, JupiterEd). This provides us with a way to share curricular products that come from our collaboration and provide access to view, post and respond to assignments, grades, etc. These tools help us to have consistent contact with families and respond to their needs and questions. 2018-19 CEP 20  We are also planning to engage families more broadly in shared celebrations of learning such as our science and math fairs, book talks, talent shows, digital narrative exhibitions and other celebrations of learning throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Private grant from the Heckscher Foundation for Children Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Meetings through the fall semester will yield one curricular product per teacher participating on the teams that can be used as benchmarks for progress. Additionally, mock Regents and January Regents exam performance will act as a benchmark. At least a 2% increase in exam or course passing will be considered indicative of improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Curricular products will be used to assess progress and Regents and course passing data from Scholarship reports will be the measures used to gauge progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have focused on Danielson Domain 3 for several years by developing sets of effective practices in questioning, discussion, assessment and engagement that have been shared across the school. However, there is more work to be done to articulate the clear connection between these practices and deliberate planning practices. In particular, our most recent full staff reflections on our growth in these areas have identified work to be done to clarify and refine connections between Domain 1 and Domain 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that results in an increase in the consistent use of effective planning and preparation strategies. Teachers across the school will implement strategies from our co-constructed strategies, yielding a 4% increase in the number of teachers rated as Effective or Highly Effective in component 1e in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Professional Learning Committee will meet weekly to plan whole group and grade level instructional team meetings to focus on developing best practices related to planning and preparation SWDs and lowest third Twice monthly PL block of time (re-purposed time) to focus inquiry cycle on sharing, implementing, and evaluating the effectiveness of planning and preparation practices through the analysis of student and teacher work samples. SWDs and lowest third PL Committee All teachers in Grade level and whole group configurations Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We plan to engage families and support their understanding of what Effective School Leadership and Strategies means in the effort to make families better partners in learning at home. The primary way that we will engage them is through communicating through our online platforms (Parent Newsletter, Google classroom, JupiterEd). This provides us with a way to share expectations, provide access to view, post and respond to assignments, grades, etc. These tools help us to have consistent contact with families and respond to their needs and questions. We are also planning to engage families more broadly in shared celebrations of learning such as our science and math fairs, book talks, talent shows, digital narrative exhibitions and other celebrations of learning throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Significant time will be allocated from our overall PL plan for grade level instructional teams to meet. School schedule has been modified via SBO to provide for this time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of fall semester, 2% of teachers will have improved one performance level in component 1e in Advance. This will serve as a good mid-point benchmark and indicate appropriate progress is underway. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance ratings will be used to assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Involving families more deeply in the life of the school should always start with creating a welcoming environment, inviting families to take part in what we do and make it better. This is something that we always encourage but more participation is always appreciated and needed. Our parent school environment surveys usually provide us with a nice level of feedback that is generally positive. However, the total number of parents and families that turn out for our big, school-wide events are lower than we want. We know that many of our parents and families are busy and hard working folks that generally trust us to provide a positive environment for their children. This was clear in the results of our last QR and we very often get feedback from parents in face-to-face meetings that reinforce this idea. We do believe, however, that more direct involvement and participation in our big, school-wide events would add real value to these events and experiences. They have become traditions that we are always interested in developing more--that could only be better with more family engagement and participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our parent involvement efforts to increase parent and family involvement and create a welcoming environment and enrich the civic life of the school, will increase by 10% the participation of parents and families in four major school-wide events (i.e. Thanksgiving, Skating Trip, Talent Show, Field Day). 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Twice in the Fall semester and twice in the Spring semester Park East will hold special events that involve the entire community in celebration. These events include our Thanksgiving, Skating Trip, Talent Show, Field Day events. All staff will engage in phone call campaign, posting messages in our calendar app, and other outreach efforts during our weekly Family Engagement time Wednesday mornings) . Parents, family members and other caregivers Workshops on students' courses, understanding the transcript and graduation requirements, graduation and college application process, financial aid, social and emotional supports will be a part of the regular monthly schedule of PA meetings. Parents, family members and other caregivers All staff and administration SLT, PA, Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 during Wednesday FE meetings Ongoing from September 2018 to June 2019 during monthly PA meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 100 Schools Project, Heckscher Foundation for Children, College Bound Initiative Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following human resources will be utilized to attain this goal-- all teaching staff in their role as Advisory teachers, the parent coordinator, administrators, paraprofessionals, and aides. We will also make adjustments to our schedule to accommodate and support the parent participation in the activities that we are implementing in this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Between semesters, in February, the number of families attending our Fall events will serve as a mid-point benchmark. A 5% increase in involvement by the mid-year will show progress toward the 10% increase by year end. Involvement in the Talent Show and Field Day at the end of the year will show progress toward and attainment of our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance lists at events and feedback on parent school surveys will be used to assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All tenth graders are included in order to capture all. Mathematics All 9 th grade students are included Science All students are included Social Studies All students are included Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tenth graders are programmed for a double period of English. These classes are designed to provide students with, among other things, reading comprehension strategies, vocabulary building, and strengthening overall literacy skills. We are providing students identified as needing academic intervention in math with both small group and one-to-one tutoring through an in-school pullout program. All students are afforded the opportunity to avail themselves of early morning tutorial sessions. The primary focus of these sessions is to build test taking skill All students are afforded the opportunity to avail themselves of early Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group with additional tutoring available When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Classes meet every day. Students will be served in small group pull out and also have the opportunity to attend additional tutorial sessions Classes meet every day, and tutoring sessions areMonday, Wednesday and Friday, from 8-9am Small group/Tutorial Sessions are scheduled from 8-9am Monday, Wednesday and Friday Small group/ tutorial Sessions are scheduled from 8-9am Monday, 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students are included Wednesday and Friday Sessions are scheduled from 8-9am Monday, Wednesday and Friday One-to-one and small group morning tutorial sessions. The primary focus of these sessions is to build test taking skill All students are provided at-risk services through referral to the guidance counselor and social worker. Our advisory system provides additional support 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Special, confidential meeting times scheduled with guidance staff and AP PPS to provide support for STH--the will be provided uniforms, school supplies, books as needed.) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● A hiring committee including administrators, teachers and students will recruit and screen candidates through a process of interview and demonstration lessons to ensure that we attract highly-qualified teachers. ● Mentors will be assigned to support struggling and teachers who are not Highly Qualified ● Teachers on a tenure track will participate in a special group called the Tenure Academy that supports the development of the practices of the teachers so they become highly qualified. In this group, teachers on a tenure track will meet with the AP of Instruction and Supervision for weekly meetings during which teachers will reflect on practice, explore data to improve instruction, and co-plan with peers and the AP. ● The pupil personnel secretary will work closely with the HR Director on the network team to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Working in consultation with the Superintendent's team, the school conducts teacher- led and teacher planned professional development that emphasizes meeting alignment with the Common Core. This year, the use of Danielson’s Framework for Effective Teaching will be the anchor for this professional development. Effective instructional practices related to the competencies in Danielson that are a part of the teacher evaluation system, Advance, will be explored, practiced and perfected through simulation and cycles of inquiry team work. When appropriate, paraprofessionals and other staff members are included in these activities. When appropriate, parents are informed of current program modifications or newly adopted initiatives that have been collaboratively agreed upon, to further our students’ academic progress. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 32  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A group of 8 teachers (four selected by the principal and four selected by the UFT Chapter Leader) participated in the a committee that reviewed the options and recommended assessment choices to be used for the MoSL. Ongoing PD for all aspects of Advance have been the focus of weekly meetings. Staff receive training in use of the rubrics for MoTP by evaluating video of lessons. Additional one on one PD is available with coaches, the Lead Teacher, and administrators to help teachers to improve their practices and score better on all of the Danielson components. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 33  school allocation amounts) Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal $239,849.00 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local $2,615,937.00 X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, part 3 and Section 5d, part 3 Section 5a, part 3 and Section 5d, part 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 34  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Park East High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Park East High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: understanding the Individualized Educational Plan this workshop is called IEPs for Dinner), Financial Aid, Understanding the College Application Process, Using JupiterGrades-- the gradebook system at Park East, parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th, of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing the school newsletter (the Park East Post-- web publication) that is designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing access for all parents/families to JupiterGrades accounts (online grade-books) for regular communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Park East High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 2018-19 CEP 38  agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement forEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Park East High School Borough Manhattan School Number 495 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kevin McCarthy Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Caroline Worthington Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Suzy Ort Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Lourdes Velez Parent Coordinator Xiomara Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 406 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.48% 2018-19 CEP 43  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Informal assessments are used that are generated by the teacher. They are administered during class and the data is used to inform instructional decisions by the teacher. Since we have a small population and only one teacher, the opportunities to differentiate instruction on an individual level are possible. The teacher creates individual instructional plans for each student . Opportunities exist for the ESL teacher to collaborate with teachers in content areas based on assessment data shared through student information system (Jupitergrades). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 44  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of programs for ELLs is tracked by disaggregating their grades and performance data through information systems like Jupitergrades. This allows us to focus on ELL performance not only on big, summative exams, but also performance throughout the year in all classes and content areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Most students enter our school at the Expanding level and test out at the Commanding level before graduating. This next effect of this is students are proficient quickly and our total number of ELLs is consistently low over time. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. A. The organizational model is self-contained. ELLs are placed according to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL and other assessment scores. B. Classes are un-graded with the mixed proficiency b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Assistant Principal with the guidance staff carefully evaluate NYSESLAT and LAB-R scores to determine the instructional minutes. Our instructional time per week for ELLs go beyond the required time under CR Part 154. Each class period is 39 to 43 minutes depending on the day of the week. The Entering and Emerging levels receive 630 minutes of services; the Transitioning level receives 420 minutes of services, and the Expanding level receive 210 minutes of ENL and 210 2018-19 CEP 45  minutes of ELA. Instructional time is calculated per amount of period, per day times 5 days 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The core content classes use English as the LOI and utilize ENL methodology. Instructional approaches include the use of leveled texts and modified assigments for each level. Content specific acadmemic vocabulary is practiced and PD sessions and common planning time allow teachers to collaborate in the development and design of curricula to support ELLs. Text complexity and use of evidence in argument are the focus for development of Common Core reading and writing standards. The language development must be scaffolded; therefore, tapping into their prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives with meaningful activities that they can utilize in the outside world. The teachers enrich and reinforce vocabulary that is essential in comprehending content knowledge. The ENL teacher integrates comprehension strategies in her daily planning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A no dual language program 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. We do not generally have many SIFE in our school. We seek to identify ELLs that have had an interrupted formal education. If they are identified, they are placed in a self-contained program, 5 times-per-week for 90 minutes. Students will explore and develop literacy skills. The students also have one ELA class where they are exposed to literature and literary elements in anticipation of the ELA Regents. Classes are in the provided leveled libraries and new books are introduced regularly. B. All newcomers and/or those who score below cut score (B) on the NYSESLAT are placed in a double period language development class (R) daily along with a daily ELA class on the same level that is literature-based (T). If the NYSESLAT is not available, then a NYSITELL test is given to determine the appropriate ENL level for students. Further, AP and Guidance Counselors determine students’ course of study. The annual NYSESLAT will determine if the ELLs are progressing. Moreover, we have an on-going after-school program and the ENL teacher has had training on comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books, and literary elements. This also aligned and reinforced in ELA classes. C. Developing ELLs often have difficulty in reading and writing skills. Therefore, our efforts have been to strengthen their comprehension and exposing them to rich, authentic texts. Students have daily reading with a guided activity that the teacher models. Usually, the activities involve activating prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives. All ENL teachers have had training in comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books, and literary elements. This also aligned and reinforced in ELA classes. D. Long-Term ELLs who are six years or more in an ENL program demonstrate that they are taking more than the prescribed amount of time to gain proficiency in English. These students continue with services until they test out with the NYSESLAT. These ELLs are also recommended to attend the after-school instructional program and/ or credit recovery. This year, we are tracking students by using available data systems like Jupitergrades to see if they are passing classes and making progress by using NYSESLAT scores. These students receive Academic Intervention Services from our instructional programs that range from ELA/Literacy to Regents Prep. The ENL teacher has had training in comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books and literary elements. 2018-19 CEP 46  E. Long term ELLs receive ENL services which is determined by their LAB-R and/or NYSESLAT scores. These students are encouraged to attend after-school tutoring and extended day programming. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? are a ELL-SWDs often have difficulty in reading and writing skills. Therefore, our efforts have been to strengthen their comprehension and exposing them to rich, authentic texts. Students have daily reading with a guided activity that the teacher models. Usually, the activities involve activating prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives. Teachers have had training in comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books, and literary elements. ELL-SWDs are also recommended to attend the after-school instructional program and/ or credit recovery. We are tracking students by using available data systems like Jupitergrades to see if they are passing classes and making progress by using NYSESLAT scores. These students receive Academic Intervention Services from our instructional programs that range from ELA/Literacy to Regents Prep. Teachers of ELLs and SWDs use leveled libraries and other ancillary texts as well as using texts used in content area classes in order to differentiate support according to student's needs. Particular emphasis is put on language development intrinsic to content areas (e.g. science-specific vocabulary) Curricula are developed in collaboration with teachers in content areas and support for ELL--SWDs is specifically addressed in this collaboration in order to accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Most of our SWDs are provided with a full ICT instructional program plus additional SETTS periods in order to enable them to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. The school organizes and schedules common planning time in order to facilitate the collaboration of teachers in developing more personalized and differentiated curricula and instructional practices to benefit the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for our students involve Regents Prep during after school for all content classes and credit recovery for credit accumulation and Regents Prep. Title 1 funds are utilized for ELLs in need of credit. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Achienve 3000 Reading tracker, Plato Learning Acussess 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are included in after school and supplemental services. We have a credit recovery and tutoring after school programs for which they participate in. Our year round after school tutoring programs are structured for ELLs to make gains in attaining proficiency in English. The program gives ELLs access to Regents prep with literacy support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support the learning of ELLs in content areas and language development are meaningful and real world literary and academic texts, technology used for gathering research information and to develop writing skills, print-rich 2018-19 CEP 47  and visual aides (including use of Smartboard) and charts (T-charts, diagrams, graphic organizers, collaborative activities that involve group projects). Thematic approaches for the whole class, magazines, and newspapers to create stories, cooperative learning/social interaction. The instruction must be modeled with real world materials. There should be read aloud and silent reading involved in the lesson development. Teachers focus on building reading comprehension skills, use of evidence in argument and development of academic vocabulary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N/A no TBE, DL programs available at this time 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ESL classes have mixed grades with mixed ages. Our ELLs are all leveled according the reading and writing scores on the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and other assessments. Therefore, teachers differentiate by examining data and informing instruction to their needs. The teacher can group students according to weaknesses and form work groups where parts of the lesson can focus on their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support the learning of ELLs in content areas and language development are meaningful and real world literary and academic texts, technology used for gathering research information and to develop writing skills, print-rich and visual aides (including use of Smartboard) and charts (T-charts, diagrams, graphic organizers, collaborative activities that involve group projects). Thematic approaches for the whole class, magazines, and newspapers to create stories, cooperative learning/social interaction. The instruction must be modeled with real world materials. There should be read aloud and silent reading involved in the lesson development. Teachers focus on building reading comprehension skills, use of evidence in argument and development of academic vocabulary. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As we often accept new students over the counter, we provide an orientation to the school that integrates the students into our program. Our advisory program, which every student is programmed for twice a week, continues this support throughout the school year for all four years that a student attends. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? AP Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A No dual language programs available at this time 2018-19 CEP 48  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PD Plan Literacy Learning and Language Development • How much reading is enough? (read aloud, silent reading) • Readers and writers workshop- • Cooperative Learning Activity: Reading, Think-Pair-Share, Sequencing Reading and writing content towards ELA Regents • Infusing standards in lesson planning with comprehension standards • Literary Elements in all ESL levels • Integrating word finds and visuals in daily lessons Teaching Language through Content • Why teach language through content • New ESL Approaches-English language Development (thematic units) • Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (focus is on academic Content) • Content based Instruction – teaching both language and content with Thematic inquiry (making content meaningful and functional) Scaffolding Language • Making meaning Explicit • Learning in group settings • Engaging students in authentic work • Leveled libraries with literacy support Reading and writing in a second language • Planning for Reading – Developing activities for before, during, and after reading that are meaningful • Selecting books with universal themes • Familiarity with genres – writing for a purpose and to have a particular organizational structure • How to build knowledge of a topic (scaffolding) • How to model texts (for group work and independent writing and reading) Integrating Language and subject learning • Planning curriculum mapping with thematic units • Developing formative and summative assessments and other more extensive projects and assignments •Backward planning The teaching staff has ongoing PD. The school-wide PD will focus Literacy in which elements of inquiry and differentiation are embedded. Teachers in their Common Planning Time will meet once a week.Paste response to question here: The staff has Common Planning Time where teachers are informed and have discussions on ELLs. We have assemblies with teachers and students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff during PD sessions has ELL training. The training includes instructional strategies and materials to assist ELLs in class. This helps to support teachers that have ELLs in their classroom. This is also part of their CPT where teachers plan lessons together and create curricula for all students. Professional Development is dedicated to language acquisition as described in previous sections, including a focus on best 2018-19 CEP 49  practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. PD calendars and agendas provide accurate records for PD activities. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our Parent Coordinator informs and invites parents to school activities and functions. Because our program is so small and we serve so few ELLs, the ENL teacher can also provide multiple opportunties for individual meetings throughout the year to focus on goals and progress. She is the first person they meet when parents enter the school. Parents do get involved if called to come and discuss about their child. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Generally parent involvement at our school is most successful when we share student progress and provide workshops and activities that inform parents about ways that they can be active partners in preparing their child for college and careers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kevin Mccarthy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M495 School Name: Park East High School Superintendent: Don The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We look at home language surveys and informal surveys conducted at parent conferences to determine the translation and interpretation needs of our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language The vast majority of our students and their parents Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 53  require only English and a smaller number, Spanish translation and interpretation services. We also have between 1 and 8 whose preference is one of the following-- Ethiopian, Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Chinese, Czech, French, Haitian-Creole, Fulani, Urdu, Vietnamese, and Yonba. The parent coordinator, assistant principal, and principal all communicated this to the school community through e-mail messages, and orally during staff meetings. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We send newsletters, calendars, announcements about parent-teacher conferences and other meetings on a regular basis. All documents that require translation before being mailed or backpacked home are translated by the bilingual (English/Spanish) parent coordinator. In the event that she is unavailable, the principal’s secretary and a school aide who are both 2018-19 CEP 54  bilingual can provide these services at any time. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences and curriculum nights happen once in the fall and once in the spring each year. Guidance counselors, teachers, attendance teacher, and administrators all have informal interactions with parents (e.g. calls to parents). We also share information through a grading program called Jupitergrades--this program will translate into some but not all preferred languages. These informal contacts happen as needed and on and ongoing basis. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 55  All of the parental notification requirements of Section VII will be fulfilled by posting information in the main office near the parent coordinator's desk. In addition, a mailing, message via phone and e-mail outlining these rights will be made by the parent coordinator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through interviews and surveys utilizing our school website, we gather feedback about the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 56 
