2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 05M499 School Name: FREDERICK DOUGLASS ACADEMY Principal: AYISHA FULLERTON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Frederick Douglass Academy 1 05M499 31050001499 6-12 School Number (DBN): 2581 Adam Clayton Powell Blvd. New York, NY 10039 212-291-4107 212-491-4417 Phone Number: AyishaFullerton Fax: afullerton2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: AyishaL. Fullerton MarquisHarrison Cynthia Russell Alison Harris N/A District Information Geographical District: 5 Superintendent: 123 MorningsideDrive New York, NY 10027 Danika Rux Superintendent’s Office Address: drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 769 7500 Phone Number: 212 769 7619 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: YuetChu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue, 8th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646 470 0721 Phone Number: 212 356 7564 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AyishaFullerton MarquisHarrison Cynthia Russell Elizabeth Jones LevonSmith Courtney Henry Eldryn Steele LaTashaRoss VilmarieCarmona Alfredo Cid *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Alexis Bascombe Monique Sheppard-Minnis Carey Ma Alison Harris Sandra Thompson JeaninneBrown N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our Mission Statement states: The Frederick Douglass Academy will provide a nurturing, academically challenging environment that supports the educational success and social development of our students. Courses will be taught by uncommonly dedicated teachers with a heightened focus on the needs and interests of each individual learner. We are ever cognizant of our primary mission as a college preparatory and are committed to nurturing our students through the college process while offering rigorous courses that prepare them to compete and excel at the most selective universities in the nation. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is nationally recognized as one of the finest college preparatory schools in the nation. Our team of educators is committed to providing a rigorous, innovative, and rewarding curriculum that will not only lead all of our students to attend the college of their choice, but also prepare them for the academic demands of a college setting. At present we offer 12 Advanced Placement classes and we continue to develop relationships with colleges and universities so our students can earn college credits while in high school. We encourage and expect all of our students to graduate with an Advanced Regents Diploma. The Frederick Douglass Academy (FDA), serving the Harlem community of New York City, has had one very special mission since 1991: to prepare students from the surrounding community to succeed at the college or university of their choice. This is accomplished by offering opportunities for personal growth through extracurricular activities, providing support in the college process for students & their families, and ensuring a rigorous curriculum that prepares students for the academic expectations of the top colleges and universities in our nation. First and foremost, college preparation is the primary focus for all students at FDA. In addition to traditional courses, FDA offers a wide variety of Advanced Placement (AP) classes in all subject areas, including history, literature, foreign language, mathematics, and the sciences. Students who take and score highly on AP exams earn credits toward colleges and universities. During the application process, this shows potential colleges and universities how prepared a student is for the rigors of college level course work. FDA’s commitment to college preparation extends to its College Office where students and their families are guided through the college process. The College Office regularly communicates with students and their families to support them throughout the college process. The College Office also cooperates with the guidance department and teachers at FDA. From start to finish, the College Office strives to serve students and their families in the application process, financial aid, acceptance, and scholarships. We have many successful and vibrant college partnerships which include collaborations with Columbia University, Cornell, Ithaca College, Syracuse University and MIT. We also partner with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  the Hayden Foundation and the Charles Schwartz Foundation to support extended day tutoring sessions that support classroom instruction. Our strength is College and Career Readiness where 100% of our graduates are accepted to college and 85% of our students are enrolled in college within the first 6 months of graduation, which far exceeds both New York City averages. It should also be noted that ELL students are at the extreme top percentile for four year diploma rates. One of our challenges is to achieve a graduation rate above 90%, and have created several high interest courses to achieve that end. These courses include Engineering, Robotics, Aviation and Computer Programming.For the 2017-2018 school year high school graduation rates are at 84%, an improvement of 9% since the 2015 - 2016 school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school has a 30% special needs population in the middle school that is significantly under-performing their peers when examining ELA and Mathematics State Test results. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Collaborative Teachers was the element that our school made the most progress of over the past year. As we move into the next school year our focus is Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. These areas are crucial to the level of instruction in the classroom and the environment in and outside the classroom that supports student growth and success. The school's program will be designed to support common planning for teachers and support collaboration in departments and cross departments to support student success. Common planning time will be used to discuss, analyze, and adjust instruction with DataWise Protocols, facilitated by teacher leaders in each department area. Assessments that will be used to drive this work are: 1. Independent Reading Literacy Assessment (IRLA) 2. ELA and Math State Test Scores 3. District Wide Assessments 4. Regents Data 5. Interim Assessment Data/Mock Regents/Mock AP Exam data Additionally, all classrooms and teachers will be using the framework in lesson planning that ensures that students are clear about what each unit of study's focus is called the "3W's" (example below) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Framing the Lesson: Learning objectives for the day that are visible in all classrooms as well as “The 3Ws” for framing the current unit of study (What are we learning?, Why are we learning it?, Where is it leading?). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M499 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1362 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 42 27 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 21 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 74.0% % Reduced Lunch 4.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 24.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.15 2% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 18.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 80% 75.8% 16.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 111 106 89.5% 1.8% 16.1% 69.5% 1.4% 2.9% 10 24% 8.1 9.1% 25% 94% 89% 86.8% 23% N/A Yes No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X N/A X Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School's Strengths Our school's strength is the comprehensive program and curriculum offered in grades 6-12 that promotes retention as students matriculate from grade to grade supporting advanced placement and college preparatory work in the high school grades. Over the past year we have had 200 students participate in our advanced placement program where more than half of the students scored 3 or better on any given AP exam. Additionally, all students enrolled in AP Calculus received a 5 on the exam. Students are engaging in rigorous course work and are earning college credit both on and off site. This past June 2018 we achieved at least a 70% pass rate in the following Regents examinations: English, US History, Physics, and Chemistry. Additionally, (insert # here) 8th grade students have passed the Algebra I, ELA exam, and US History Regents Exams. Lastly, 104 of 280 rising juniors have already completed the ELA regents with a passing score of 65. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  2. Priority Needs The needs that will be addressed is higher written response scores on the Global History(64% passing) , Algebra I (46% passing), and ELA Regents Examinations (71% passing), students being able to explain their answers with word problems in Science and Mathematics that would lead to increases in corresponding pass rates and increased student level of proficiency in middle school on the ELA and Math state exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, rigorous instruction at Frederick Douglass Academy will be evident through the implementation of the Hochman Writing Strategies in all core content areas evidenced by: ● 5% increase in the school’s overall passing rate on the CCLS ELA Regents Exam ● 3% increase in levels of proficiency on the ELA State Exam for all middle school students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will be programmed for common planning time to support the implementation of the Hochman Writing Strategies. Monday professional development time will also be used to assess the effectiveness of identified strategies to be used to support student growth and success in writing. Middle and High School Teachers and Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders, and Special Education Liaison September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders, and Special Education Liaison September 2018 - June 2019 Middle School Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Principal, and Assistant Principals Monthly (September 2018- June 2019) Guidance Department, Teachers and Administrative team Teachers will use strategic inquiry models to track the effectiveness of the identified writing strategies and will use DataWise protocols to support the analysis, structure, and communication of results to the larger community. Middle and High School Teachers and Staff Middle school teachers and staff will use the Independent Reading Literacy Assessment (IRLA) and the District Wide Assessments to track the reading and writing skills of each student in the middle school. Middle School Teachers Workshops will be held for parents and families throughout the school year with the following themes: 1. How to promote independent reading in the home? Middle School and High School Teaching Staff 2. How to understand your child's scores on state examinations ad assessments given throughout the year? 3. How to use Skedula/PupilPath to communicate with your child's teachers about progress? 4. How to use Skedula/PupilPath to know your child's progress in with writing assessments? 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. The Parent Coordinator will arrange for monthly parent workshops with master teachers addressing topics such as rigorous instruction instruction and common core standards. These workshops will begin the third week of September 2018 and continue till June 2019. Parent and family workshops this year that are aligned with rigorous instruction will include topics such as: 1. 100 Book Challenge and IRLA Assessments - MS an 9th Grade Families 2. Next Generation Science Standards - MS and HS Families 3. Understanding scores on ELA/Math State Exams - MS Families 4. Understanding the Regents and AP Examinations (What is required of students?) 5. Supporting students with Special Needs in Literacy - MS and HS Families 2. Parents will have access to Pupil Path, where they can actively monitor their child's assignments, academic progress, and expectations online in real time. The training will be offered in the September orientations, and be led by expert Pupil Path/Skedula instructors Joel Bianchi, Carey Ma, and Adeyemi Mahon, this work will be overseen and organized by our Assistant Principal for Student Life, Vernon Johnson. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Renewal of Skedula software contract 2. Hiring of an Assistant Principal 3. Professional Development with Writing Revolution 4. Purchasing of Core Curriculum (ELA, History) 5. Per-Session hours allocated for teachers, guidance counselors, and other staff to support after school and before school activities with families and students and support the planning and learning required out of the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  By the end of February 2019, progress check-in will occur where teams of teachers have gathered data through diagnostic testing with writing strategies in each core content area and have determined the baseline for each student at the MS/HS level in writing. At this time, strategic analysis and processes of inquiry will have commenced to determine how to adjust instruction based on initial data findings. Indicators of school progress will include: 1. Students in special populations moving up levels in reading and writing skills 2. Students increasing scores for on demand writing tasks in all core content areas 3. Students increasing levels on vocabulary assessments 4. Students being able to speak to their current level of performance and what they think is needed for them to improve based on teachers feedback to the student. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Diagnostic Writing Assessments - The Writing Revolution 2. Independent Reading Literary Assessment (IRLA) 3. Mock Regents/Mock Advanced Placement Exams 4. Interim Assessments given by Departments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. School's Strengths Our school has a multitude of academic and extra-curricular activities for students before and after school. Some of those include over 20 PSAL sports for students in the high school, tutoring that is offered for before and after school and supports students academic needs for intervention. 2. Priority Needs Our most recent Quality Review (2017) we received a developing rating in: 1.4 Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Programming that supports the need of middle school students both instructional and social/emotional support is necessary to see appropriate academic gains. Dips in attendance rates for middle school and high school students have 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  been inconsistent for groups of students who need extra support with social interactions and who are struggling academically. 3. Policies, Practices, and Structures Our Guidance Department and Attendance team are structures that support is one structure that support the whole child. Guidance counselors meet with families and students systematically to communicate expectations and support students emotionally. Additionally, attendance outreach is conducted by team members to ensure the school has provided support to navigate barriers that withhold students from coming to school consistently and without interruption. Other structures that help support students holistically are: 1. Harlem Hospital Clinic housed inside our school 2. Counseling groups for students (BeHer, Boys and Girls Club of Harlem Social Work Programs) 3. College Counseling 4. Peer Tutoring and Mediation Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school and its partners will cultivate a supportive environment in which students feel safe, supported and challenged as evidenced by an average daily attendance rate of at least 90%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The School Safety Committee will meet monthly and identify trends and school safety issues of focus that will improve both the perception and actual safety of the school. Teachers and staff will be trained in Restorative Practices to support students and families with conflict resolution Expectations for student behavior and participation in school activities will be published with a student handbook which all students will receive at the beginning of the school year and used throughout the year and in classrooms. Administrators, Teachers, Deans, School Safety Administrators, Teachers, Parent Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Deans, School Safety August 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Teachers, Staff, and Students August 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and Teacher Leaders Attendance team will meet every other week to discuss attendance data for groups of students and create student support plans to ensure the needs of students are being met. Attendance Team September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Department 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. The guidance department will present Successful Support Strategies in the grade level September Orientations. Among the topics will be the following: a. How to read an academic transcript b. Strategies for close communication with teachers c. How to assist with homework d. Strategies for using Pupil Path e. Addressing your child's social and emotional needs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  These will be conducted by the grade level guidance counselors with support from the lead staff on the usage of Pupil Path. 2. Each month the parent coordinator will arrange for one of the guidance counselors to be present at the monthly family welcome meetings. 3. The SLT will arrange for a guest presenter to hold a meeting in November for all parents and students. This meeting will focus on the subject of a Supportive Home Environment. 4. High School parents will receive training on the use of Naviance (College tracking software) in October. This training will be conducted by the guidance staff and the college office staff. . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Attendance Reports 2. Suspension Site data 3. School Safety data 4. School Safety Team meetings and Attendance Team Meetings 5. Deans (human resources) 7. The school will seek to limit per session hours for parent and student support activities (a maximum of 20 hours total) for the orientations and the subsequent monthly guidance meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, in partnership with our school partners, we will monitor the impact of the social emotional and enrichment opportunities available to students and families as evidenced by: 1)at least 85% attendance daily 2)at least 10% year over year increase in family participation in Back to School nights and Parent Association meetings 3)at least 10% increase of student participation in extra curricular activities in before and after school Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Attendance Reports from ATS 2. Attendance records from parent meetings and curriculum nights 3. Attendance from school activities before and after school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school will significantly improve the teachers' ability to collaborate together. In the 2017 Quality Review the school's ability to "establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provide supports to achieve those expectations" was highlighted as an area of celebration. Specifically, "school leaders expect all teachers to engage in student-centered practices, and leaders provide ongoing feedback." To further anchor our teachers in common strategies that cut across all departments, we will train departmental team leaders in writing strategies that will be turn keyed to all core departments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in a variety of interdisciplinary, department and grade level collaborative teacher teams in order to use data to inform lessons and units that engage scholars in differentiated learning and rigorous tasks, resulting in an increase in the four-year graduation rate that meets or exceeds 85%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher team leaders will be carefully identified in every department. They will be selected based on their accomplishments with in their departments and ability to lead others. Select teacher team leaders from each department will receive extensive training on The Writing Revolution method. This training will cut across all departments and anchor every department as writing strategies are fundamental to all instructional planning. Teacher team leaders will turn key training sessions to their respective departments and engage in lesson plan development based on the professional development. The teachers will study and report the impact of the writing strategies on formative and summative assessments. Teacher will meet both on Mondays during professional development time and daily during common planning time. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade 6-12 Students, Middle School and High School Teaching Staff Middle School and High School Teaching Staff Middle School and High School Teaching Staff Middle School and High School Teaching Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Team Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Team Leaders October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Team Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In conjunction with our CBO's, School leadership team and teacher leaders , FDA will facilitate workshops to help families understand the concepts of teaming and collaborative work that happens in the grade teams and other content teams. Also, parents will be able to explore the impact of the comprehensive literacy and writing strategies that will be used in classes to best support their children at home.. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Our CBO's in collaboration with our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for implementation and oversight of these workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. A Framework for Teaching by Charlotte Danielson and NYCDOE Advance System 2. Common Planning for middle school teachers and core content teachers during the school day. 3. Per Session rates for Teaching and Supervisory Staff 4. Professional development sessions with The Writing Revolution. 5. When necessary full day coverage and training fees 6. Grading of materials may need Per Session funding 7. Book studies for leadership cabinet and once a week planning meeting with the leadership cabinet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February of, 2019 every core subject will present how they have departmentally implemented the strategies of The Writing Revolution to adjust their lesson planning. They will discuss the progress, the successes, and challenges. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress of the every department will be rated on a rubric by the other departments. They will note commendations, recommendations and next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school will significantly improve the Teachers' Influence in the planning and execution of the goals in each department. In viewing the Effective school Leadership category of the 2015 Framework for Great Schools the lowest rated component is Teacher Influence. The teachers want a greater say in establishing the goals and practices of the school. This coincides well with training that the District 5 (D5) Superintendent has initiated with all D5 Principals to establish Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will nurture professional growth of teachers by developing teacher leaders in department, interdisciplinary, and culture teams to deliver instructional and social-emotional support to scholars as evidenced by an 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  increase in cohesive instructional units, shift in classroom culture and high expectations across classrooms that allows for :   the 4-Year Graduation Rate increasing to 85% increasing from developing to proficient on QR Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All core departments will identify a problem of practice as it relates to how students complete writing tasks in the core subject area. Teachers will use diagnostic testing in the Writing Revolution as a source for data. Core Subject Teachers All departments will develop a plan of inquiry to address the problem of practice . Core Subject Teachers All Departments will meet at least once a week to discuss plans and steps to modify instruction to support findings Teachers and Staff September 2018 - December 2018 September 2018 - December 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders, and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Department team leads and school culture team leads will assist and lead parental workshops about the important work that is happening in the teaming structures. Parents and families will be informed about the parts of the school culture that needs to be addressed and instructional shifts that take place in the classroom to help support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Writing Revolution Instructional Materials 2. Relevant departmental performance data (state test scores, Regents, passing rates, etc...) 3. DataWise Books and Protocols Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 26, 2019 all departments are expected to give individual presentations to the entire staff concerning the progress of the identified writing strategy and discuss plans of action. These presentations will be observed by their peers who will provide commendations and next steps and conduct inter-visitations to view best practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Writing Revolution - Diagnostic Testing and Rubrics 2. In class assessments that incorporate the writing strategies Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school X X X community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. N/A SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In examining issues that have strong effects on the families and community of our students, we have found that parents need a safe space for students to engage in academic work during the hours of 3 to 6 PM on a daily basis. It is during this time period that students are typically unsupervised by parents and the effect can be unproductive for middle school and high school achievement. Our numerous partnerships allow our school to remain open after school and during the weekends. In examining the needs of our students, we have found that 100% of our honor roll students participate in one or more of our extended day programs. In examining the needs of the parents, we will coordinate monthly meetings that are based on their interests. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Our goal is: By June 2019, more than 50% of families will be engaged in a school events, parent leadership support, and/or connected with family resources. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will partner with community organizations to host after school programs that will be able to support Middle School student learning during the critical hours where parents are typically still at work. We will partner with the Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation to support academic growth from 3-6 PM all weekdays. Though the program will be offered to all, it will target Lowest Third Middle School Students. Parent surveys will be filled out by parents to generate topics of interest. The Parent Coordinator will work with our Community Based Partnerships to provide monthly informational meeting. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 6-8th Grade Students September 2018 - July 2019 AP Middle School, Sports and Arts Supervisor Parent meetings will always be the third Thursday of each month The school will have a mandatory extended day period programmed for all ELL students so that they may attend all regular classes during the school day without scheduling conflicts. This will support families of ELL Students. 6-12th Grade ELL Students September 2018 - July AP ELL and ELL Teacher 2019 The School will offer Extended Day Tutorials for Special Needs and AIS General Education Students for classes through private grants funded by CEI-PEA. 9-12th Grade SPED Students October 2018- June 2019 AP SPED and SPEC Teaching Staff Advanced Placement tutorials for high functioning students. The School offers 14 AP classes and students can perform better with tutorials during the critical extended day timeframe. 9-12th Grade Students in AP Classes October 2018 - May 2019 AP Building Operations and AP Teaching Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Boys and Girls Club of Harlem Edge (Formerly known as Sports and Arts Foundation) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Harlem Lacrosse Leadership Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. NYCDOE funding for Middle School Extended Day Programs 2. Funding from CEI-PEA 3. Teaching Staff 4. Supervisory Staff 5. Parent Volunteers to assist with programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The progress of all programs will be compiled during the month of January 2018. We will chart attendance rates for these meetings and conduct appropriate outreach with the support of the PTA president, school partners, and parent coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The community based organizations will present to the administrative team the progress during quarterly meetings. During these meeting the CBO will give a "State of the Program" address that will be focused on attendance data and the common goals between school and program. To ensure accuracy, the school will always assign a staff member to work along side any program that exist both inside and outside our school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All Students with the course grade of 65, and lower during each marking period and also all Level 1 and Level 2 students (based on New York State Test results) All students identified during the marking period for needing academic support. All 11 th and 12 th graders who have not passed the English Language Arts(ELA) regents. All students in Advanced Placement classes that are identified as needing academic support. All Students with the course grade of 65, and lower during each marking period and also all L1-L2 students. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted support for low performers on Monday through Friday (3 -5PM) extended day activities (Middle School) Regents Preparation Extended Day for each English Regents class using a 20 hours to be decided from each teacher from January till regents date (High School) Advanced Placement Preparation Extended Day for English and English Literature Advanced Placement (AP) test for 20 hours to be decided and utilized by teacher from January till Advanced Placement test (High School) Targeted support for low performers on Monday through Friday (3-5PM) extended day activities (Middle School) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, Computer, and One on One tutoring Extended Day, Saturday, Holidays Small group, Computer, and One on One tutoring Extended Day, Saturday, Holidays 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Science Social Studies All students identified during the marking period for needing academic support. All 10 th , 11 th , and 12th graders who have not passed the Mathematics Regents. All students in Advanced Placement classes that are identified as needing academic support All 10 th , 11th and 12th graders who have not passed the Science Regents. AllL1-L2 Science students. All students in Advanced Placement classes that are identified as needing academic support. All 10 th , 11 th , and 12th graders who have not passed the Social Studies Regents. AllL1-L2 Social Studies students. Regents Preparation Extended Day for each Mathematics Regents class using a 20 hours to be decided from each teacher from January till regents date (High School) Advanced Placement Preparation Extended Day for Mathematics test for 20 hours to be decided and utilized by teacher from January till Advanced Placement test (High School) Regents Preparation Extended Day for each Science Regents class using a 20 hours to be decided from each teacher from January till regents date (High School) Advanced Placement Preparation Extended Day for Science AP tests for 20 hours to be decided and utilized by teacher from January till Advanced Placement test (High School) Regents Preparation Extended Day for each Social Studies Regents class using a 20 hours to be decided from each teacher from January till regents date (High School) Advanced Placement Preparation Extended Small group, Computer, and One on One tutoring Extended Day, Saturday, Holidays Small group, Computer, and One on One tutoring Extended Day, Saturday, Holidays 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Small group, Computer, and One on One tutoring School counselors will provide guidance and crisis Counseling services before school, during school, after school, on Saturday and or during holidays, At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students in Advanced Placement classes that are identified as needing academic support. All students identified by Guidance Counselors and Social Workers as needing behavioral modification services. All students identified by Deans, in consultation with the Guidance Counselor Record, as having accumulated three conduct referrals during any marking period. Day for Social Studies AP tests for 20 hours to be decided and utilized by teacher from January till Advanced Placement test (High School) Guidance and Crisis Counselor will provide direct support to students, especially SWD, LEP, African-American, Hispanic and economically Disadvantaged Students in grades 6-12. The service is offered in English and, with the aid of an interpreter, Spanish and other languages. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with various personal issues including school, friends, family, current events, etc 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 130 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. Support for school uniforms 2. Waiver of school fees 3. Specialized guidance services as needed 4. Shelter visits 5. Extended day programming Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. • Work closely with our Director of Human Resources to identify teachers that are compatible with our vision and mission • Encourage our teachers to refer other effective teachers to join our faculty • Advertise in various media to recruit effective teachers • Based on the individual professional needs of teachers, administrators, coaches and other, instructional development team members will design differentiated professional development plans that incorporate coaching, modeling, demonstrations and collaborative planning sessions to reach customized professional development goals Teachers and the instructional support team will meet regularly during common planning time, professional development sessions (internal and external), and depart/subject/grade meetings to: • Discuss ways of engaging all students in learning • Reflect on their teaching practice and actively engage in planning their professional development • Looking at students work • Assess student learning • Create and maintain effective learning environments • Organize curriculum to facilitate students’ understanding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  • Presentations by Inquiry Teams • Learning walk • Training in Differentiated Instruction and practices • Peer observation and constructive peer feedback • Provide teachers with resources/professional development in areas that have been collaboratively identified as in need of improvement • Learn how to utilize Acuity to analyze diagnostic and predictive results • Learn how to customize exams to address academic deficiencies • Train teachers on looking at specific questions that refer to strands of the ELA and Math standards • Based on the curriculum needs per grade, there will be three separate department meeting to maximize the ability. Time is allocated for Professional Development for the entire staff on Friday. • Teachers will be recruited for specific licences and assignments and placed meticulously. • Teachers will have an opportunity to submit for alterations in assignments by submitting preference sheets. • Teachers with a particular expertise will be given special consideration for specialized course electives (for example, Aviation, Mechatronics, Robotics, etc...) This is a method that has yielded great success in retaining High Quality Teachers. • High Quality Teachers will have the opportunity to propose a teaching schedule that includes Advanced Placement courses, depending on the level of mastery of the teacher and their demonstrated success on state tests and regents. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school actively utilizes the trainings offered by the NYCDOE, particularly those that relate to the Common Core. The school also leverages its Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) for high quality professional that informs teachers, supervisors and relevant staff on a consistent basis. We have an approved School Based Option that allows for unfettered professional development sessions weekly on Fridays. The school has implemented Skedula software, which will allow teachers to compile and align data with the Common Core Standards with an accelerated speed that allows teachers to spend more time planning as opposed to the timely process of compiling data. All teachers will have been trained in the first week of September , 2018. The trainings will continue on a monthly basis to ensure teachers are able to fully utilize this powerful software. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Professional development sessions promote the Danielson Rubric to ensure quality. We have identified Danielson 3b (Questioning and Discussion, 3c (Student Engagement) and 3d (Assessment) as the most high leverage components for our particular school. Consequently, special attention is given to these components in every departmental meeting. There is also a focus on evidence based instructional strategies. The focus of these strategies is to show evidence of efficacy to support instruction in English Language Arts, Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science. These strategies have heightened importance for Special Education and English Language Learners. The Principal and administrative team regularly attend professional development sessions offered by the District 5 Superintendent Gale Reeves. In addition, the D5 Superintendent regularly arranges fro subject specific professional development opportunities offered be her team, and other experts from outside agencies. The school makes it a practice to attend every such session offered. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  All teachers participate in departmental meetings in which student assessments are determined. All teachers during department meeting decide on the assessment and professional development alignments.. All teachers are invited to attend weekly departmental meetings. All teachers are engaged in inquiry team work which analyzes student assessment data. Our school will continue to offer workshops during Professional Development days on best practices for understanding and utilizing student assessment data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 690,780.00?N 0 0 0 11,200.00 10,940 7,657,976 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Section Reference(s) (5E) N/A N/A N/A (5A, 5C) (5B) (5A-5E) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Frederick Douglass Academy 1 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Frederick Douglass Academy 1 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; establishing a literacy night to help support parents understand what the reading and writing demands are of students and how they can help support their children with the work.  Parent to Parent - guide book - supports parents with giving information that is helpful for school integration and need to knows.  Middle School Bonding with Books - MS students and parents read the same books while the students are reading it in class. Parents would receive comprehension questions to bond with their children and promoting independent reading at home. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   HS Family Book Club - discussions about themes that are addressed in books that students are reading in class. Restorative practices can be used to discuss themes that appear in the books chosen. ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Frederick Douglass Academy 1, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 35 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This academic year (i.e. 2018 - 2019), there are 56 entitled ENL students in grades 6 to 12 at the Frederick Douglass Academy I. We target all ELL students for our Title III after school program: They all need additional support to grow, accelerate and enhance their English language development, succeed in their content area classes, pass the required NYS exams, and be college and career ready. However, of the 37 ENL students in grades 10 to 12, we have 5 grade ten, 3 grade eleven, and 2 grade twelve ELL students who still need to pass 1 or more of the five required Regents exams needed to be on grade and/or graduate from high school. All of these 10th and 11th, and 2 of the 12th graders are also struggling in their course works. The other 55% of this category of students are passing or have passed some of the required courses and Regents exams. Also, we have grades 6 through 9 ELL students. Most of these students are currently passing their classes and making progress with their credit accumulation. However, this progress needs to be sustained and these students need to be supported in preparation for the New York State/Regents exams. The need for additional support is to ensure that our ENL students meet and exceed standards in academic language and content. At the Frederick Douglass Academy I, we provide our ELL students with English Language instruction that is at least consistent with the standards set by CR Part 154 of the New York State Education Department. The Title III Students Academy (T3SA) is an After School Academic Supplemental program focusing on strengthening the English language acquisition and Academic English skills and growth of our ENL students. It offers targeted academic support to students who are at risk of failing English/ESL and/or content area classes and/or Regents. It supplements our instructional program and provides our ENL students with direct instructions that are above and beyond instructions received in their English/ESL, Mathematics, Social Studies, and Sciences classes. The curricula for the courses are aligned with the NYS Performance Standards and NYS Learning Standards and this program helps our students to meet these Standards. The program offers participating students a more focused instruction and the opportunity for the participating teachers to better tailor their instruction to address gaps in academic skills identified in collaboration with teachers in the regular day program. The participating subgroups would include but not exclusively the Long term ELLs, Developing ELLs, and Students with with special needs. Our entire instructional program focuses on the development of language, skills and competencies that allow students to reach proficiency and/or mastery of academic language, content knowledge, and critical thinking skills. The teachers use ESL methodologies to scaffold, model, and foster student-centered learning. Students are engaged in hands-on activities using various teaching manipulatives and technology, and creating posters, charts, and other visual aids. It is offered after school on Monday through Thursday for two hours each day: English/ESL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will meet once a week (i.e. Thursday), Social Studies once a week (i.e. Wednesday), Mathematics once a week (i.e. Tuesday), and Science once a week (i.e. Monday) for about 13 weeks from November 2018 to June 2019. For English/ESL classes, students will be grouped by levels of proficiency using NYSESLAT/Lab R data. For content areas, they will be grouped by subject and performance levels. Three licensed content areas teachers (i.e. social studies, mathematics, and science) will each team teach/integrate with a licensed ESL teacher on Monday through Wednesday to provide language acquisition, support and development along with achievements in the content areas. The English language acquisition and academic English skills will be further reinforced on Friday by the ESL teacher. These 4 teachers will result in 7 personnel hours per week resulting in 91 per session hours [1 ESL teacher 52 hrs (1 teacher x 1 hr per day x 4 days in a week x 13 wks), 3 content area teachers 39 hrs (1 teacher x 1 hr per day x 1 day in a week x 13 wks x 3 teachers)]. Since our primary objective is to support our ENL students in achieving English proficiency, the language of instruction will be English, using ESL strategies. The following is the breakdown of teachers by certification license area: •100% of ESL teacher hold the NYS license in English to Speakers of Other Language •100% of subject teachers hold the NYS license in the respective content area. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers and staff that support the ENL students must be skilled in the delivery of instruction and services to these students. Professional learning opportunities are on-going. Supervisors and/or teachers conduct workshops weekly to share effective learning strategies and to improve instructional practices so as to impact students' achievement. They engage in "turn-key" training, sharing best practices and techniques in which they have developed competency through attending off-site conferences and workshops. Topics such as questioning and discussion techniques, student engagement, development and implementation of effective assessment tools will be addressed, and refresher training on the implementation of the Teacher Effectiveness Model using the Danielson Framework for Teaching and on the incorporation of the use of technology as a tool for instruction to enhance teaching and learning will take place starting September 2018 through June 2019. In addition to professional learning opportunities which are available monthly during the school day (at no cost to Title III), 4 teachers and 1 administrator of the Title III Academy meet once a month after school from November 2018 to June 2019 for about 1 hour to discuss students' achievement and instructional strategies, collection and analysis of actionable data, intervention design, assessments, and use of multiple entry points/differentiation and technology to support instruction and understand the cultures and/or needs of ELL students. These workshops, provided by the ESL teacher, would also include strategies for supporting ENL students in their reading comprehension and vocabulary building in the content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part C: Professional Development The following is the breakdown of teachers by certification license area: •100% of ESL teacher hold the NYS license in English to Speakers of Other Language •100% of subject teachers hold the NYS license in the respective content area. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To ensure higher achievement of our ENL students, their parents/guardians must be engaged in targeted activities. Hence, parent engagement activities are ongoing. In addition to parent orientation activities during ELL identification process, ELL parents are engaged during multiple parent-teacher conferences each year and during the periodic award assemblies that recognize students gains. There are special breakout groups for ESL parents and students at Freshman Orientations in June and at the new students parent orientation meetings. Workshops are designed to familiarize parents with the NYC public school system (including accessing the NYCDOE website), help them support their children's academic achievement (including using technology to learn English), and introduce to services available to them through local Community Based Organizations (CBOs). Other activities include, but not limited to meetings / workshops focusing on instructional issues, such as assessments, standards, promotional policies, and strategies for them to support their children's academic progress. These activities may be provided in-house, sponsored by the superintendency or the Network. In addition to the parent-teacher conferences, ELL parents are notified of these activities through school phone messenger, mailings, direct communication with counselors, teacher, and parent coordinator. Often times, ELL parents will approach school officials themselves to request information about ELL related activities. Translations are provided as needed. This reciprocal approach allows for parents and school officials to communicate and be involved in a system of progress. Light refreshments may be provided. CBOs will facilitate workshops on topics that include resume writing, job searching, interview preparation, language development, and computer literacy. Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs will facilitate a series of workshops on immigrant-specific issues. The workshops are offered through partnerships between our school and CBOs at no cost to the school. The Title III Parents Academy (T3PA) will run between November 2018 to June 2019. It will offer 11 weeks of 2 hours of basic/functional English/ESL classes that would include but not limited to computer/internet use, understanding academic records and college awareness/prep sessions to parents of ENL students on Saturday 8 am - 10 am or 9 am - 11 am (may change due to parents availability resulting from the Parent Survey still being calculated as of this writing). One ESL teacher and the AP for ESL will facilitate the program resulting in 44 per session hours [1 teacher 22 hrs (11 wks x 2 hrs), 1 AP 22 hrs (11 wks x 2 hrs)]. The instruction will focus on the development of skills and competencies that the parents need to engage their children in school related activities. The teacher use ESL methodologies to scaffold, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities model, and foster parent-centered learning. Parents are engaged in hands-on activities using various learning manipulatives and technology, and creating posters, charts, and other visual aids. Residual of the grant will be used to purchase/replace supplies/stationary. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Frederick Douglass Academy I Borough Manhattan School Number 499 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ayisha Fullerton Coach Lea Brown ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Papa Tall Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Monday / Math Teacher/Subject Area Nisha Ramirez / ELA Related-Service Provider Sherrie Wohl / Speech Superintendent Danika Rux Assistant Principal Thomas Ajibola Coach Michael Oyedele School Counselor Chris Middleton Parent Thierno Baila Parent Coordinator Yvette McKenzie Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1478 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.79% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 K 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In assessing the early literacy skills of our ENL students we use data from tools such as NYSITELL, teacher designed formative and/or summative assessment, and running records. From this data, we notice across various home language groups that about 9% of the ENL students has low and about 18% has medium literacy and comprehension skills. The data is shared with other core subject teachers of the ENL students and it is used for common planning with these teachers, especially the ELA teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There is regular collaboration between ESL teacher and the content-area, especially ELA, teachers on improving the literacy, comprehension and pronunciation skills of the ELLs. These teachers are engaged in curriculum planning, implementation, and professional development. They are continuously planning to create an effective grouping of students and to differentiate and align lessons to the needs of these students. Co-teaching between ESL and content area teachers allows for further collaboration in integrating academic language development and literacy in content areas. This collaborative work provide opportunities for extended learning, especially through technology and after school programs. The peer-tutoring program provide crucial support for the ELLs and increase the acceleration of their achievement in content areas. Also, these students are engaged in field trips, including museums and theater productions, that provide opportunities for students to report and write about their experiences, thereby enhancing their oral and writing language development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessment is used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need for the ELLs. Also, a 5-Week Assessment in the four modalities (i.e. listening, speaking, reading and writing) is administered to the ELLs so as to determine their progress in English Language acquisition. This assessment is administered about every 5 weeks. Current student work from a current assessment is compared with the last one to determine progress and area(s) of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered and analyzed, the ENL teacher, in collaboration with the content area teachers, plan for appropriate intervention to address the needs of the students and to provide professional development for the teachers. The planning is implemented in freestanding ENL (i.e. Stand-Alone and Integrated) classes. The collaboration between the ENL and content area teachers provide needed support to the ENL students. Also, extended-day learning opportunities are provided to allow students to receive intervention in a small group setting. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels and grades reveal that 4% of our ENL students is at NYSESLAT Entering (EN) level, 5% at Emerging (EM) level, 18% at Transitioning (TR) level and 73% at Expanding (EX) level. The area of opportunity for our ENL students is writing, which is found across proficiency levels. Yet, we need to continue to make gains in Listening, Reading and speaking, in that order. Of the 2 ENL students that are EN , 1 is an LTA and the other is new to our school; and of the 3 EM, 1 is new to our school. Our school receives most of our new students in grades 6 and 9. In grade 6, 8 of the 10 ELL students (80%) scored a level 1 on their last ELA state exam and 6 of the 10 (60%) scored a level 1 on their last Math state exam. Also, 2 of the 10 students (20%) scored a level 2 on the ELA and 4 of the 10 (40%) on the Math. In grade 9, 15 of the 20 ELL students (75%) scored a level 1 on their last ELA state exam and 16 of the 21 (76%) scored a level 1 on their last Math state exam. Also, 5 of the 20 students (25%) scored a level 2 on the ELA, 3 of the 21 (14%) on the Math and 2 of the 21 (10%) scored a level 3 on the Math. In addition, 2 of the 3 (67%) grade 9 students that took the Algebra I Regents passed. We have already started to work with these students so that they may make appropriate gains. Most of our ENL students were LAB-R/NYSITELL tested at their previous NYC public school. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  These findings will be disseminated at our initial faculty conference. At various time during the first marking period, the ENL teacher will participate in each content-area's department meeting to further explore the findings and discuss how support and interventions would be provided in the content areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school currently offers a Freestanding ENL program. a) The organizational model is mainly departmentalized. b) The program model is largely Heterogeneous. This model allows students at different levels to be a resource to each other. ENL students at the entering level are also in homogeneous grouping for their skills building activities. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL students are programmed for the mandated numbers of instructional minutes as required under CR Part 154. In addition to ENL instruction, students receive in English the same instruction in content areas as non-ELLs. Specifically, ELLs that have performed at Expanding level or Transitional level on the NYSESLAT receive at least 4 forty-seven minutes of ENL instruction per week. Those that performed at Entering or Emerging level receive at least 8 forty-seven minutes of ENL instruction per week. ELLs who are at Commanding level are provided with 2 forty-seven minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. Entering: 180 min. stand -alone + 180 Min. Integrated ENL/ELA (9-12th grade additional 180 min. Emerging: 90 min. stand-along + 180 min. Integrated ENL/ELA + 90 min. stand-alone or Integrated ENL/content area. Transitioning: 90 min. must be integrated ENL/ELA + 90 min. stand-alone or Integrated ENL/content area. Expanding: 180 min. integrated ENL/ELA or another content area (math, science, social studies). Commanding: 2 years with 90 min ESL/ELA or another content. a) Explicit ELA is delivered to ELLs. They are instructed in the fundamentals of the English language through engaging listening, speaking, reading and writing exercises using ENL metholodologies. Pictures, graphics, stories, cultural explorations, etc., are engaging for ELLs. The home language (HLA) is used to assist our ELLs in the acquisition of English proficiency. As in ELA, the ENL teacher uses individualized and differentiated instruction, workshop model, grouping by skills, and music to enhance listening skills, readers and writers’ workshop and conferences, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ENL classes are self-contained and approach English language learning through activities, literature, compositions, and grammar in context across content areas including ELA, social studies, math, science, etc. Although students may assist each other in their home languages when needed, English is the primary language used in the class. Using HL in small groups not only helps ELLs develop content knowledge, but as they share out to the large class or summarize in English the teachers have the opportunity to assess both HL and academic English growth. Instructional approaches include student-generated discussion, communication, projects, and group work; teacher guided and supported direction, differentiated use of graphic organizers, art, posters, word walls; bridging and scaffolding of prior knowledge through multi-cultural readings and argumentative speaking/debate; essay writing processes and peer editing; creative and critical writing; listening and oral activities; active engagement in class activities; and teacher as well as peer assessments. Lesson for students are prepared using models such as backward planning by design that offer motivation and organization. Furthermore, the instructor is knowledgeable in a variety of instructional tools, such as QTEL, Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP), Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Academic Language Scaffolding (ACL), etc. SIOP is a program model for teaching grade level content through adaptation and integration of content, activities and concepts through demonstrations, use of visuals and vocabulary study. CALLA is program model based on cognitive learning theory that links instructional strategies to appropriate language acquisition strategies. It integrates content area instruction with language development activities and explicit instruction in learning strategies that increase thinking/study skills. ACL involves a step-by-step process of building students' ability to complete tasks on their own. It consists of several linked strategies, including modeling academic language, contextualizing academic language using visuals, gestures, demonstrations, and hand-on learning activities that involve academic language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Whenever possible, we ensure that our ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages through assessments by our ENL teacher who is proficient in many of the language groups of our ELLs. Furthermore, if the student failed the NYSITELL and the home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB-R to assess the student's level of proficiency in his/her home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all ELL subgroups according to students' individual needs, multiple learning styles, and English language proficiency across skill sets (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). Additionally, the following considerations are applied to various ELL subgroups: a. (SIFE) - SIFE students need extra attention and differentiation both within the classroom and outside so as to make the transition into a school setting and with socialization easier. It is essential to also have parent communication with these students, especially in order to assess their level of involvement in prior schools and to allow parents to also transition into the child's current school environment and its expectations. SIFE students are supported through group work, graphic organizers, paired-student activities through a buddy system, maximized individualized attention from the ENL teacher, and available tutoring with the teacher after school. Tutoring across the content areas is also available inside and outside the school for SIFE students to seize an opportunity for growth. b. Newcomers ELLs (receiving services 0 to 3 years) are assessed for their prior educational knowledge and settings, as well as for their knowledge of English, and administered the NYSITELL (and, if necessary, LAB-R) examination if it is their first time entering the New York City school system. Student are supported through a variety of teaching strategies and student tools, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  including graphic organizers; peer, team, and group work/activities; age appropriate and culturally authentic literature; and grammar supported through reading, writing, listening, and speaking contexts. Students are also encouraged to share their life experiences so as to help transition into the classroom experience. Classes are heavily based on bridging writing and reading educational gaps, and essay writing for critical thinking so as to eventually reach mastery. Tutorial is also available for students. c. Developing ELLs (receiving service 4 to 6 years) - should be approaching the transitioning stages and close to testing out of ENL and towards proficiency in English Language. At the assessment level, these students are monitored for progress and flagged for intervention with parents and extra services support if extra time is needed per student. Curriculum for both transitional and expanding level ELLs is based in ELA and other core areas components to support mastery in reading, writing, listening, and speaking with academic language development and classic/modern literature in mind, especially as they prepare for the Regent exams. Classroom activities include group work projects, essay writing, peer review, and presentations, think charts, cause/effect charts, use of past tense and future tenses, choral and individual reading, poetry, theater, and film. Students are also encouraged to support projects with technology including research on the internet and creative art. Tutoring is also available after school both in ENL and across content areas for extra support. d. Long-Term ELLs (receiving services 7 or more years) - Extra support is often needed to assist this group of students to meet proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT, in classes, and on the Regent exams. Support services for ELLs cater to the varying ways that students learn and to the best way each individual student may succeed. Some students need differentiated teaching and learning on reading and learning skills, while others need concentration on writing. Individualized assessment, collaborative group activities, peer-to-peer learning , and modification of tasks and work are all ways to help boost a student's growth and success. e. Former ENLs (receiving services up to 2 years after exiting ELL status) - will continue to be supported as needed through collaboration between the ENL teacher and the students' other subject teachers. Finally, all ELLs are accommodated during the Regents testing period to receive maximum support allowed. This includes testing with extended time, word-to-word glossaries, etc. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs need extra attention and differentiation. Since the teacher receives the IEPs for these students, he/she is familiar with the IEP mandates for these students, including additional testing accommodation, their classroom or academic/emotional needs. Instructional strategies used by ELL-SWD teacher that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development include student-generated discussion, communication, projects, and group work; teacher guided and supported direction, differentiated use of graphic organizers, art, posters, word walls; bridging and scaffolding of prior knowledge through multi-cultural readings and argumentative speaking/debate; essay writing processes and peer editing; creative and critical writing; listening and oral activities; active engagement in class activities; and teacher as well as peer assessments. Lesson for students are prepared using models such as backward by Design that offer motivation and organization. Furthermore, the instructor is knowledgeable in a variety of instructional tools, such as QTEL, SIOP, CALLA, ACL, etc. SIOP is a program model for teaching grade level content through adaptation and integration of content, activities and concepts through demonstrations, use of visuals and vocabulary study. CALLA is program model based on cognitive learning theory that links instructional strategies to appropriate language acquisition strategies. It integrates content area instruction with language development activities and explicit instruction in learning strategies that increase thinking/study skills. ACL involves a step-by-step process of building students' ability to complete tasks on their own. It consists of several linked strategies, including modeling academic language, contextualizing academic language using visuals, gestures, demonstrations, and hand-on learning activities that involve academic language. Other grade-level materials used by ELL-SWD teacher include appropriate textbooks, bilingual glossary, dictionary, journals, newspapers, test samplers, language lab, REALIA, video, DVD/CD/tape player/recorder, CD ROMS, computer softwares, internet access, field trips, etc that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Since our ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed in most of the content areas and in all extra-curricular activities, they are fully immensed in language acquisition as they use of the English language and benefit from exposure to and participation in the use of relevant academic language. This approach uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Explicit ELA instruction is delivered to ELLs. They are instructed in the fundamentals of the English language through engaging listening, speaking, reading and writing exercises using ENL methodologies. Pictures, graphics, stories, cultural explorations, etc., are engaging for ELLs. The home language is used to assist our ELLs in the acquisition of English proficiency. As we work with all ELL subgroups in their language acquisition and academic language development, the newcomers and the long-term ELLs are targeted for intense support. While a strong support and appropriate intervention services for the newcomers would ease their progression towards mastery, the long-term ELLs would benefit from intervention services that would improve their language acquisition. As in ELA, the ENL teacher work with other core content area teachers to support our ELLs with individualized and differentiated instruction, workshop model, grouping by skills, and music to enhance listening skills, readers and writers’ workshop and conferences, etc. Math, science, and social studies teachers are encouraged to approach the ENL teacher, guidance counselors, and other supervisors with concerns for ELL student progress so that they can help support their content for ELLs. Core content area teachers are supported through ENL instructional techniques, individualized help with students, and are freely open to communicate with the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher also sends out email notices offering instructional tools such as links to bilingual glossaries or graphic organizers. Furthermore, the ENL curriculum cuts across content areas to support topics instructed in other content areas, and students are welcomed to discuss and seek help for projects, vocabulary, and lessons. Core area teachers are encouraged to share ideas that work in the classroom with ENL teacher to mutually support each other. This is done often through face-to-face meetings. All teachers of ELLs are encouraged to track students' progress on state assessments and flag any concern. As with teachers, parents of ELLs can track students progress and communicate about grades, attendance, and curriculum. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will intensively use data to better understand students' work, progress and plans for improvement. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. a. ELLs have equal access to all our school programs. In addition to supplementary services, ELLs are afforded participation in all academic and extra-curricula extended day, weekend and holiday programs. Since we do not make distinction between our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  students when it comes take advantage of all available opportunities, all ELLs have access to all that is offered at the school. They have access to all school organizations, sports, tutoring, etc. and are encouraged to participate in events and activities that bolster the general English population's knowledge of multiculturalism, such as the various heritage celebrations. ELLs are involved in the dance and theatre performances. b. Tutoring across content areas is also available throughout the year for students both within the school and through outside sources. After school tutoring is offered to help these students in their most needed areas of English. Students are also encouraged to engage in outside resources, volunteer services, or tutoring organizations that can help with communication skill as well as bolster a student's confidence for all English modalities. After school tutoring funded through Title III concentrates on both entering ELLs who need tailored support across the modalities as well as as expanding students who want to discuss literature or receive Regents exam help. Such after school tutoring supplement students' core curriculum through graphic organizers, dictionaries, vocabulary strategies and reading activities (i.e. how to search for terms in the dictionary, vocabulary bookmarkers, games, etc). Also, after school tutoring helps ELLs with standardized exam preparations, especially with useful language strategies which can be brought to the test taking situation. Supplemental counseling is offered to ELLs through the guidance counselors. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional material is used in ENL classes and in the school (content areas and in the library) to help support ELL students. In the ENL classroom, a variety of reading materials, word-to-word, and English dictionary posters, text readers, and classical literature are staggered by levels and student interests. Classroom libraries are provided for students to peruse for independent and supported reading. Graphic organizers, charts, and anticipation guides are part of the usual routine and aid in differentiating instructions even within level. Film and visuals are used to support writing and reading, as well as to stir creative thinking and imagination. responsible internet use for research and study is encouraged and taught in class. In addition, documentary and historical websites such as PBS and History Channel are used to support text material and offer background videos or timelines. Furthermore, should a student have an IEP that calls for additional help in the classroom with a paraprofessional, then tat student is supplied with such aid. The instructional materials used to support the learning of ENLs (including content area as well as language materials) are textbooks, bilingual glossary, dictionary, journals, newspapers, test samplers, language lab, REALIA, video, CD/tape player/recorder, CD ROMS, computer/internet access, field trips, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered through the availability and use of dictionaries in the home languages. Words walls and other posters in both languages are posted whenever possible. Students are taught cognates to help activate prior knowledge. Using HL in small groups not only helps ELLs develop content knowledge, but as they share out to the large class or summarize in English the teachers have the opportunity to assess both HL and academic English growth while offering actionable feedback. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. While taking into account the ELLs' grade levels, required services support and resources correspond mostly to their proficiency levels. Currently, most ELLs travel together by age and grade cohort although proficiency levels must be factored into the equation. Classroom material and instructional support are age, grade, and level specific and are staggered for student ability and within the common ENL classroom. Furthermore, in class text books and reading libraries are labeled for student ease either for English proficiency levels or subject matter. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Newly enrolled ELLs are mandated to participate in our incoming students orientation. Some students are invited to the Summer Bridge Academy. This orientation and Summer Academy, organized and implemented by administrators, guidance counselors, teachers, parent coordinators and parents, assist incoming students with their plan for success, basic skills and plan for improvement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives offered to ELLs include French, Japanese, and Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N\A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All personnel, including ENL teacher, receive professional development on ENL and ELA standards; on pedagogy, including individualized instruction, workshop model, Ramp-up, QTEL, mastery learning, questioning technique; and needs specific to ENLs. Teachers participate in weekly learning walks and intervisitations. Every effort is made to align instruction with the standards. Our tentative 2017 - 18 ELL-specific PD or PLOs will include: Student identification process and ENL program framework (ENL Coordinator, September) Key to effective communication with ELLs and their parents (ENL Coordinator, September) Testing accommodation and alternate assessments (ENL Coordinator, October) This will include assessments that are not totally writing-dependent and specific strategies which have been successful with ELLs. Instructional methodologies and strategies in ENL classroom (ENL Coordinator, October) As they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards in supporting ELLs , teachers of ELLs are offered professional development in methodologies and strategies, such as Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Academic Language Scaffolding (ACL), etc, that can be incorporated into the balance literacy program that will enhance the language acquisition of our ELLs. These will include ENL methodologies and strategies, establishing active learning projects, using portfolios to assess performance, modifying assignments, providing opportunities for discussion, repeat, check for understanding, interactive word/phrase boards, engaging in teacher reflections, curriculum mapping. Such methodologies include scaffolding, use of realia, art and role-play to aid in comprehension. The ENL teacher uses instructional material that incorporates colorful graphics, text, vocabulary definitions, graphic organizers, and big-book. Collaborative approach where teachers focus on instructional approaches that articulate long-range teaching strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Teachers will also be attuned to the variables that affect language learning and instruction: age, grade, placement, personality, educational background, level of proficiency in both the native language and English, parental support, needs of the student and resources available to the teachers. Demonstrations and modeling will be the focus of much of the instructional presentations. These include providing many nonverbal clues such as pictures, objects, gestures, and intonation cues. As competency develops, other strategies include building from language that is understood, using graphic organizers, hands-on learning opportunities, and cooperative or peer tutoring techniques. Language components will be stressed. Vocabulary study (which is excellent for all students) will be a pivotal piece and ENL students will work with a buddy. Co-teaching in Integrated ENL classroom (District 5 ENL Liaison, November) integrated ENL pose challenges in co planning and what co-teaching should look like in the classroom. We will continue to look closely to meet the needs of students in the integrated ENL classroom by addressing the 4 modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing in each lesson. We will look at the 7 models: Whole Class - Team teaching - One lead teacher, one teacher Assesses - One lead teacher, one teaching on Purpose. Small Group Instruction - Station Teaching - Alternative Teaching - Parallel Teaching - Re-Teaching Data collection and analysis (District 5 ENL Liaison, January) Another big area we focused on was the EDAT report. There is a need for all ESL teachers to be able to run the report and this will be a topic in a future training. The question that was posed was: Do you know where your students are in connection to the NYSESLAT assessment? And, how are you targeting instruction for students taking the NYSESLAT? The Periodic Assessment for ELLs may give specific information on student’s language development or another idea was creating a baseline using the samples from engage NY and the NYSED website for each of the modalities. In doing this we will be able to target our instruction. These professional development activities will take place during some of our monthly faculty conferences and/or department meetings. Records are maintained by the various facilitators, supervisors, and ENL coordinator. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL-specific Professional development activities are made available to our pedagogues (15% of total PD hours for all teachers and 50% for ENL teacher). The training will be led by certified ENL teachers and/or specialists and all staff, including administrators/supervisors, teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, related services staff, secretaries, parent coordinators, etc., will be afforded opportunities to discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ENL standards, instructional strategies and alignment to core curriculum and the application of core knowledge. Records of attendance of PD/PLOs offered at the school are kept through the attendance sign in sheets and maintained by the school. Those offered by the District ENL Liaison and the MFSC (Manhattan Field Support Center) ELL Team are maintained by the appropriate facilitators/offices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Beyond the mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences, our school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs. Individual ELL and his/her parent(s) meet with the ENL teacher/coordinator and core content area teachers to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Student specific data from the last NYSESLAT exam, the available Regents exams in all content areas, the available 5-Week Assessments in the 4 modalities and the class work are discussed with the student and parent(s) so as to determine student's areas of need at school and or at home, and how the intervention would be provided to support the student. Agreement is made on how to monitor and communicate the student's progress. Since the ENL teacher/coordinator and some of the content area teachers are proficient in most of the languages present in our school, they are available to provide the interpretation and translation as needed. When no one is proficient in the language and the parents does not have with them an interpreter, the school will reach out to the DOE Interpretation and Translation Unit for assistance. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In recognition of the importance of the school-home partnership and continuing community involvement, ELL parents are encouraged to be involved in the life of our school. During the school year, variety of meetings/workshops are provided to parents of ELLs. Following is a tentative 2017 - 18 parent activity calendar: instructional issues and support for the ELLs and their parents (ENL Coordinator, September) Review of assessments, standards, promotional policies, and strategies for parents of ELLs to support academic progress of their children. School-Home communication in service of the ELLs and their parents (ENL Coordinator, January) Parent coordinator, guidance counselors, teachers and administrators/supervisors are frequently in touch with parents about academic involvement, students achievement and attendance. They encourage ELL parents in particular to contact them with questions or for further updates either at the school or at home. Parental contact contact involves updates on students concerns as well as acknowledgement of student progress. Parental concerns such as request for extra help through tutoring programs are also implemented, and attempts are made to communicate with parents in their native language when possible either through their own accompanying interpreters or by a faculty/staff that is proficient in the language. Saturday Computer literacy Academy for parents of ELLs (ENL Coordinator, February - June) Saturday soccer Academy for the ELLs and their parents (ENL Supervisor, February - June) Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ayisha Fullerton, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Frederick Douglas School DBN: 05M499 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ayisha Fullerton Title Principal Thomas Ajibola Assistant Principal Yvette Mckenzie Parent Coordinator Papa Tall ENL/Bilingual Teacher Thierno Baila Parent Natasha Monday (Math) Teacher/Subject Area Nisha Ramirez (ELA) Teacher/Subject Area Lea Brown Michael Oyedele Coach Coach Chris Middleton School Counselor Danika Rux Alice Cohen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Manh. Senior ELL CPS Sherrie Wohl/Speech Other Related Service NA NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M499 School Name: Frederick Douglass Academy I Superintendent: DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yvette (*Primary) McKenzie Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the Frederick Douglass Academy I (FDA I) we believe that the success of our students is largely dependent on the school, the students, and families working together in a close partnership to monitor academic progress, help build social and emotional strengths and maintain a focus on the holistic growth of the student. School-home communication is paramount. Hence, we endeavor to establish strong relationships through methods that are efficient, effective and convenient for all parties. In an effort to develop the necessary lines of communication with families who have limited or no oral and/or written English language skills, we have structured various mechanisms to bridge the communication gap. When entering the NYC DOE school system, students are given the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). The HLIS is an instrument that determines the student's status as language minority and identifies preferred home language translation needs. The results of the survey are recorded and maintained in ATS and referred to when 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  communicating with families verbally or in writing and in order to determine the necessary translation supports for documents and events. Students that arrive at our school from other schools in the NYC DOE system have generally been pre-identified through this ATS mechanism (utilizing Authority Coding). Per Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, we enter and maintain the preferred language preference for spoken and written communication for every parent/guardian new to the NYC DOE system when they enroll at our school in ATS. Also, this information is derived from the Emergency Contact Cards (“blue card”) that were supplied to families as a hardcopy at the beginning of each school year and requested that families complete and return to our school for further in-house and ATS processing. Additional information regarding the specific interpretation and/or translation needs of our students’ families is collected and maintained by our guidance staff in anecdotal and procedural documentation so that it may be easily referred to when communication with families takes place. Additionally, guidance staff, who generally serve as the key point person in communication with families, share critical language support needs information to the rest of the faculty and staff whenever necessary and appropriate. These policies ensure that our commitment to student success through open and ongoing communication with our entire school community is maintained. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral In order of frequency, following is the list of parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication: English (1437) 83.55 English (1425) 82.85 10.52 Spanish (184) 10.17 Spanish (181) 1.86 French (31) 1.80 French (32) 0.64 Fulani (14) 0.81 Wolof (11) 0.64 Wolof (13) 0.76 Arabic (11) 0.58 Arabic (11) 0.64 Fulani (10) 0.35 Bengali (6) 0.35 Bengali (6) 0.23 Twi (5) 0.29 Bambara (4) Twi (4) Chinese (3) Hausa (3) Mandinka (3) 0.23 Bambara (4) 0.23 0.17 Chinese (3) 0.17 0.17 Haiti Creole (3) 0.17 0.17 Mandinke (3) 0.17 0.12 Hausa (3) 0.17 0.12 Sanskrit (2) 0.12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Haiti Creole (2) Sanskrit (2) Soninke (2) Afrikaans (1) 0.12 Soninke (2) 0.12 0.06 Afrikaans (1) 0.06 0.06 Akan (1) 0.06 0.06 Albania (1) 0.06 0.06 Bemba (1) 0.06 Akan (1) 0.06 Estonia (1) 0.06 Albanian 0.06 Hottentot (1) 0.06 Bemba (1) 0.06 Italian (1) 0.06 Estonia (1) 0.06 Malay (1) 0.06 0.06 Oneida (1) 0.06 0.00 Seneca (1) 0.06 0.00 Urdu (1) 0.06 Hottentot (1) Italian (1) Malay (1) Seneca (1) Oneida (0) Urdu (0) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Families NYCDOE/NYSED (icluding calendar, testing dates), September School-based (including Parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information). Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Centrally translated. Generally, and in all cases, translated documents are back-packed, emailed and or mailed to parents/guardians. Some of the translation needs are met by available centrally translated documents and others are provided in-house. The diverse staff and parents at our school is proficient in many of the languages present in our school and they provide support to those parents that may need it. When necessary, we will contact the Translations and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Interpretation Unit for support. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings PTA / Grade meetings Every Month Meet and Greet / Curriculum Night / Family Night Parent-Teacher Conferences Case Conferences September and May November and March As needed How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Most of the languages present in our school are spoken by parents from countries with English as the official language. Thus, most of our parents do understand communication in English. Where this is not the case, other parent and/or staff will provide Same as above. Same as above. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Same as above. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, families of all languages will be contacted by sending a phone blast/robocall, eblast, and/or providing the information on the school website and/or PupilPath. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In our pre-school year opening Professional Development activities in early September and as part of our monthly professional development activities, members of our school community are provided with information and/or training on language access or outreach (i.e. via email, letter or in-person announcement) requirements and resources. They are aware of the staff members that are proficiency in some of the languages present in our school. Also, our school staff is aware of how to use translation and / or over-the-phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services will be fulfilled by providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. The Welcome Poster indicating the availability of interpretation services is posted at the main entrance of our building. Our school's administrative offices are staffed with people that speak language other than English so to facilitate access for parents in need of language access services. Parents are informed of their rights to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Surveys will be sent to parents in their preferred language asking them to evaluate the availability and quality of the translation and interpretation services they received. Also, we will ask at the end of each translation and or interpretation service whether or not the parents are satisfied with the availability and or quality of the services received. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 
