2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M507 School Name: URBAN ASSEMBLY GATEWAY SCHOOL FOR TECHNOLOGY Principal: KRISTINA DVORAKOVSKAYA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 310200011507 9-12 439 West 49 th Street 2122461041 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology School Number (DBN): 02M507 2122462654 Fax: Phone Number: Kristina Dvorakovskaya kdvorakovskaya@uagateway.org School Contact Person: Email Address: KristinaDvorakovskaya Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Kirk Schneider LivienneStewart ChristopherSalvato LivienneStewart RaymercyHiciano, Logan Villavicencio, Minerva Paulino, Jennifer Encarnacion Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: None Geographical District: 02 District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue Superintendent’s Office Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 2123563754 Phone Number: Affinity Schools CUNY/UA FSC: 2123567514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (718) 935-5618 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Kristina Dvorakovskaya Kirk Schneider CareliaMckenna Brian Fitzgerald CareliaMckenna RaymercyHiciano Logan Villavicenio AqualynJones Rachel Saab Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ana Roberts Chris Salvato MinervaPaulino Maria Araiz- Perez DanetteJagla LivienneStewart Member/ Parent Member/Staff Member/ Student Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology is to engage our students through inventive problem-solving that integrates technology with the habits of mind that prepare them for college and careers. Our students are prepared as creative and analytical producers of technology with an authoritative understanding of their role and influence in the digital age. Graduates will be innovative thinkers and technicians, able to use and apply cutting edge technology in a variety of fields. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. WHO WE ARE: UAG is a thriving school that has spent the last seven years building, defining and redefining what it means to be a excellent in all aspects of our work. We have systemized and concretized best practices however are always seeking to learn and grow to best serve our students and families. UAG has built a strong culture from our inception. We believe that culture building begins from the day a student is accepted. Relationships are the core of everything we do at UAG. Our school is safe in 100% of our spaces and we credit this to the strong focus on culture and community. Our core values are EVERYTHING and are the foundation for staff, student and community culture. They are: ● GRIT ● REFLECTION ● ACCOUNTABILITY ● ASPIRATION ● COLLABORATION ● EMPATHY ● SCHOLARSHIP ACADEMICS: We opened our doors in Fall 2011. We are a CTE School and consider ourselves to be a “college plus” school. Not only are our students prepared for college, they are prepared for careers in 3 areas of technology. They take traditional ALL regents courses and affiliated assessments to be competitive and attractive to colleges, scholarship opportunities and careers. In addition to focusing on technology electives, our students are expected to take four years of both regents or AP aligned courses in mathematics and science to ensure that they are challenged academically. It is the expectation at UAG that all students graduate having experienced at least one AP course to build on college ready skills prior to attending college. Our journey to college readiness has yielded results with an average graduation rate of 90% with an average of 94% of those students attend college. CTE: The “plus” side to our “college plus” model is that our students pursue one of three areas of technology during their studies at Gateway. In their freshman year, they all take an exploratory technology course that exposes them to all three pathways, however maintains a focus on software engineering, to ensure that all students leave UAG proficient in at least one computer language. At the end of the ninth grade, students are able to reflect on their performance and to select their focus for the remaining three years at UAG- Software Engineering, Digital Design and Animation or Information Technology. Students take increasing numbers of these courses in the subsequent years, culminating in 2018-19 CEP 10  industry standard assessments that include: Strata, A+, Network + for Information Technology, AP Computer Science Principles and A for Software Engineering, Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator and/or a Maya Portfolio for Digital Design and Animation. PARTNERSHIPS: Our partners help us to prepare our students for college and career readiness. School partners play active role in enrichment activities and career-related events and internships (GCSA, BBBS, Microsoft, American Museum of Natural History, Yext, NYU Poly, BMCC, AT&T, Iridescent Learning and Deloitte). Partners offer internships, job shadowing, host events and assemblies and mentor our students. Partners also inform our curriculum through our CTE advisory board. COMMUNITY: The Gateway experience starts before the school year ever begins. Staff visits the home of every incoming 9th-grader to begin relationship building. Just as the summer comes to a close, all the incoming 9th graders attend the “Gateaway,” an overnight camping trip with staff to make new friends, learn the UAG Core Values and push their limits through various challenges. One of the things that make Gateway unique is the strong sense of tradition. We have many, many community building events, including Thankcake, Amazing Race, Student/Staff Basketball Tournament, Student and Staff Holigates, Skateaway, etc, throughout the school-year for our staff, students, parents, partners and extended community. The events serve to connect the community as a whole and to provide a communicative network that is committed to student success. Our critical responsibility is to protect the community's spirit and energy. Students take charge in many ways at Gateway. They design and print posters and flyers. They lead their own events and conferences. Several students have even spearheaded an activism club to take on leadership roles inside and outside the school community! STAFF DEVELOPMENT (POWER ACADEMY): All teachers at Gateway are developed in the UAG Way of Teaching through conferencing and the Gateway Instructional Guide (GIG). The GIG is a living document that changes from year to year and reflects the best practices in our classrooms. We share common beliefs of how students learn. These beliefs are grounded in our core texts and reading list which include text such as: Mindset- Dweck, The Case Against the Zero- Reeves, Lost at School- Green, Love and Logic- Funk. Professional development is determined by staff needs based on surveys, observations and student data. Our professional development series is known as Power Academy and provides teachers with weekly, targeted instruction. This year's focus is: How can we utilize data to create more equitable educational experiences for our students? Professional development is also supplemented with special multi-session Power Academy courses known as UAG U. UAG U courses are taught by staff, for staff. They also reflect the needs of the school through observations, data and feedback, but unlike traditional professional development, they are able to dive deeper. Staff development is additionally supported by: ● Weekly teachers observations with feedback. ● Lowest third observations with feedback ● Peer observations with feedback through Teachboost 2018-19 CEP 11  ● Instructional rounds, both internal and external ● Department meetings where teachers share lesson plans, rubrics and student work using the planning protocol to challenge classroom assumptions and practices ● Student Interventions and Restorative Circles are used to deepen staff and student relationships ● External PD, to deepen our understanding of content, pedagogy and the social and emotional needs of our students. I.e., Executive Function, Teaching All Learners etc. STUDENT ACADEMICS CORE INFORMATION: Grading policy: The UAG Grading policy was developed to accurately reflect our students’ academic performance. 70% Summative Assessments, 20% Formative Assessments, 10% Academic Behaviors and Rules of the Workplace (ABROWS). Goal Oriented Learning and Development (GOLD): We have 3 types of GOLD 1. Preemptive GOLD 2. 11th Hour/Super GOLD and 3. Traditional GOLD Students receive intensive academic support through daily GOLD periods. Both teachers and guidance counselors, who serve as the academic experts of their grades, run GOLD. Students are selected for GOLD daily based on their struggles with daily learning targets. Through GOLD, students do not fall behind at UAG. DATA: We have a yearly average attendance of 90%, above the city’s average for attendance. Because we know that when students are present they are able to succeed, we have placed a priority on our attendance for the 2017-18 school year, resulting in a 4% increase. The next piece of the work is in moving our attendance for target groups to continue our progress. Academically, our data says that we are performing well across the board on Regents assessments. Our strength specifically has been the humanities regents- ELA and Social Studies. Over the past few years, we have started to focus more on having our students meet college readiness benchmarks as well as getting more students on track for Advanced Regents Diplomas. In the 2017-2018 school year, we saw an increase in our college readiness for our senior cohort, Cohort T, however not at the same rate. Of the entire cohort, 89% of students were college ready in ELA and 65% of students were college ready in Math. Although we have seen great progress in college readiness in the 2017-2018 school year, for 2018-2019, much of our work is centered on math growth, instruction and achievement, as well as maintaining our college readiness index for ELA. ENRICHMENT: UAG is not only focused on academics and careers. It also provides students with the space and place to develop and nurture many talents and interests.  Our school offers full after school programs including technology and gaming, sports and fitness, Stoked Skateboarding, art and music programming, the Big Brothers Big Sisters of NYC, and more.  UAG takes advantage of the wealth of opportunities in our neighborhood, including Broadway Shows, Ice-Skating in Central Park, and the UAG Amazing Race! 2018-19 CEP 12   UAG offers opportunities for college credit acquisition early with College Now starting in 10th Grade, and AP  courses in 11th Grade, with new Upward Bound partner Borough of Manhattan CC, Hunter College and Baruch College. Students begin college tours in 9th grade at NYC campuses including Pratt, Columbia, Fordham, City College of NY, NYU Polytechnic, New York University, Stevens Institute of Technology, John Jay College, Hunter College, and many more.  10th Grade Students visit out-of-state colleges including Princeton, Drexel, University of Pennsylvania, and Villanova.  11th Grade Students receive individual and family counseling to determine best-fit colleges, and strategies for admissions and financial aid success by dedicated College Counselor who is a leader in his field.  UAG offers laptop access in all classes to our students, as well as industry-approved technology sequences culminating in certification and relevant internship experience.  UAG focuses on character education, with six ceremonies per year to celebrate students demonstrating our Core Values: empathy, collaboration, aspiration, reflection, accountability, grit and scholarship.  Recent UAG Enrichment Internship Placements and Experiences include: American Red Cross Certification, Arthur Ashe Health Science Academy, Brooklyn Academy of Music Teen Dance Academy, Center for Anti-Violence Education Self Defense Training, Christodora High School Leadership Program, Coder Dojo, Exploring Program, Harlem RBI, HEAF College Quest, Japan Foundation Nippon Club Japanese Language Camp, Joan Mitchell Portfolio Development Club, JROTC, Kids Creative Apprenticeship Program, Men of Strength, MOTH Story Slam, Opening Act, SEO Scholars, Summer Youth Employment Program, Stoked Mentoring, Heckscher Scholars, YMCA Global Teens Service Trip to South Africa, New York Historical Society Internship Program, NFTE Gen Tech Competition, Triskeles UA Sustainability Internship, Rec Youth Media Academy, FIT Teen Programs 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our population consists of 23 % students with IEPs and have a 5% ELL population. We have the need to support them in achieving graduation rates that are comparable to our general education populations. While we have a strong and committed Special Education team, our students with disabilities and our ELLs/FELLs need continued support in meeting college readiness benchmarks, attending four year colleges, self advocacy and monitoring. At UAG, of our 455 students, 37% are CR in Math, 62% are CR in ELA and 34% are CR in both. This data does include ninth and tenth graders who have YET to take the Algebra and ELA regents. (When looking at the data of just the test takers- 74% are CR in ELA and 79% are CR in Math). We currently have 110 students with disabilities. Majority are on track for graduation with regents. For example- 90% of students with disabilities in Cohort U already have passed 5 regents. However, when looking at College Readiness, the numbers drop. Of our SWDs, 23% are CR in ELA, 21% are CR in Math and 17% are CR in both. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great schools in which our school has made the most progress over the past year has been Rigorous Instruction. Our senior cohort attained an 89% college readiness level in ELA. Advance school-wide reports, the School Quality Survey Results and assessment data all support that our school has made, and continues to make gains, in common core shifts in literacy (we increased an average increase of 13% of students reading at or above grade level from Fall 2017 to Spring 2018), planning, ICT partnerships, credit accumulation (on average 96% of our students are promoted to the next grade), etc. However, if we tighten systems, tweak practices and reevaluate approaches, we stand to improve in all areas concerning student achievement. This year we are diagnosing and evaluating which approaches are not working. For example, we are continuing our work around attendance, student tracking and monitoring and additional student supports. A specific area of focus for us is around Supportive Environment and Rigorous Instruction. While many students are able to articulate what they are learning, there are still many that are not. 2018-19 CEP 13  This year's focus is: How can we utilize data to create more equitable educational experiences for our students? 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M507 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 445 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 57.0% % Attendance Rate 55.5% % Reduced Lunch 2.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 52.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.17 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 89% 86% 82.7% 11.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 99 88 30 91.7% 1.1% 22.0% 29.2% 8.3% 4.5% 4 33% 5 N/A N/A 92% 86% 92.2% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At UAG we offer a challenging curriculum to all students. We are a “Regents School” meaning that we offer regents level courses to all students in all fours years at UAG. Students take four years of ELA and have the option of taking two AP ELA courses. Students study four years of Social Studies, four years of Science including regents Chemistry and regents Physics. They also have the option of taking AP Biology and AP Chemistry. Students at UAG study four years of math up to AP Calculus AB and AP Calculus BC. As a CTE school, our students engage in four years of technology (pathway specific) courses. As freshmen that are enrolled in an introductory course that covers our three pathways: Software Engineering, Information Technology and Digital Design and Animation. At the end of their freshman year, students are able to select the pathway that best meets their future goals. These pathways end in certifications. The technical certifications that we prepare for are: Strata, A+, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Photoshop and AP Computer Science. Our students graduate with these certifications with the ability to accept positions at tech firms while studying in college. Within the classrooms, our students have similar access to challenging tasks. According to the Quality Review (15-16) Indicator 1.2 (Proficient 3.5), “across classrooms teaching strategies consistently provide multiple entry points into curricula for most learners, and student work products reflect high levels of student thinking and most students, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities, are engaged in appropriately challenging task.” This access to curriculum, and multiple entry points, are contributors to the positive data that we see. Our graduation rate for 2018 was 93% and our average grade matriculation is 94%. UA Gateway has traditionally performed well and above city averages on Regents, specifically ELA and Social Studies assessments.. In the 2017-18 academic year, our students passed ELA at 82 %, Global History at 92% and US History at 94%. This has been the trend for the past three years. While our increases in humanities as large, we are not seeing as large of jumps in college readiness benchmarks and in our Mathematics assessments. This year, our Algebra CC passing rate was 61%. We have room to improve in achieving the college readiness benchmarks for both ELA and Math. We see the need to increase our college ready benchmarks to ensure college success. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 16  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, we will deepen rigor of our ELA and Mathematics instruction across grade levels as evidenced by a 5% increase in students meeting college readiness benchmarks in both ELA and Math Regents, from 75% to 80% school wide. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? DRP- All students Sept ELA department Given that reading is intrinsically tied to writing, we will continue to tracking reading comprehension in support of our writing goals. The ability to read and accurately comprehend what is being asked for in common core tasks is critical to our children’s success. We know that in order for students to be College Ready at graduation, students must be able to read at least at grade level. In September all Gateway students take Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Assessment. The DRP is a reading test that assesses students’ reading levels. Students will take this test two more times, once in January and once in May. The results of this test help us to understand our students’ strengths and weaknesses as readers. Knowing our students’ reading levels helps us to plan how to support their growth. Students will engage in abundant amounts of purposeful reading, writing and discussion in every discipline - at least 60 minutes of reading and 40 minutes of writing a day across the curriculum. Students will read deeply and purposefully to answer thought provoking and challenging questions. Teachers will utilize interactive lecture, workshop or literacy based lesson plan models with clear learning targets to maximize instruction. Teachers will provide vocabulary instruction prior to or embedded within lessons. The Thesis Writing Rubric and research paper in ELA courses assess the Key Cognitive Strategies. Students in the 9th-12th grade will write two increasingly unscaffolded research papers in the fall and in the spring to access and teach to their college readiness. The final paper will be of the longest length will be assigned in the fall of their senior year and will be due in the spring. In the senior year, students will write cross content papers based personal interest and a self-developed/ strong thesis. 2018 to June 2019 All students in 9th 10th 11th and 12th Grade ELA Sept ELA department 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 CEP 18  Common Core Aligned Tasks using the Writing rubric in non-ELA courses. Non-ELA teachers will use the KCS writing rubric to provide feedback on short responses as well as longer pieces of writing to ensure fluency, clarity and sophistication in writing in responses. This will support students’ progress towards college level writing. Courses targeted include: technology, economics, and other non-regents courses. The Writing Workshop provides students with the opportunity to explore relationship between features of their composition to achievement of their intentions; to develop more critical understanding of the dynamics of written genres (the relationship between author intention, text structure and reader’s responsive understanding); to receive feedback about/strategies to improve the effectiveness of composition in relation to achievement of intentions. WRITING: Research paper in all four grades using Turnitin.com: Research writing in all four years will develop our student’s ability to craft their precision and accuracy, analysis, problem formulation and communication. UAG will use turnitin.com again this year to facilitate this process. Turnitin.com is A cloud-based service for originality checking, online grading and peer review that saves teachers time and provides feedback to students to manage the submission, tracking and evaluation of their work. Teachers set up a class assignment in the Turnitin.com service and then submit the student’s work to Turnitin.com via file upload or cut-and-paste. The program consists of three core functions: checking originality, grading online and conducting peer reviews. When checking originality, Turnitin compares the submission’s text to a database of 45+ billion pages of digital content (including archived Internet content that is no longer available!). over 337 million submissions in the student archive, and 130,000+ professional, academic and commercial journals and publications. This service has helped us keep student work original and authentic. Students are forced to craft and use their own words when conducting Research papers. Literacy Advisory- Students who enter UAG at a Level 1 ELA are selected to participate in a Literacy Advisory. This course is taught by our strongest English teacher and Special Education teacher. All students in non ELA courses September 2018-June 2019 Non ELA dept teachers All students in ELA courses September 2018-June 2019 ELA department All students in ELA courses September 2018-June 2019 ELA teachers 9th graders September 2018-June 2019 9th Grade teachers, programmer, guidance Saturday Math Academy- Targeted regents prep for students not yet college ready. Guidance will utilize Dexpro as a tool for identifying and managing attendance All students not college ready Guidance, Math and English 10 teachers, Parent Coordinator, AP December 2018-January 2019, April 2019-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 19 Guidance, Administration Department Teams September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Lowest Thirds, SWDs All students taking course 4X a year. English and Math Department, AP All All September 2018-June 2019 December 2018 - June 2019 Math Department Schoolwide Student Support Committee- Weekly guidance and administrative and support team meetings to look at student data week to week Targeted students Department Meetings: Teachers will work with departments to present their interim data. They will collaborate to leverage areas of exam where students perform lower to increase student achievement. Through inquiry and alignment of missed common skills, they will solicit ideas from department for improvement & share best practices. They will collaborate with department for shared adjustments to instruction. The effectiveness of the reteaching plan will be assessed with each on going interim Math and English Interim Assessments- Teachers will administer regents aligned interim assessments four times during the year to track student progress to meeting the goal of college readiness. The teams will utilize Zipgrades to compare results. Teachers will be tracking student performance based on ELL, FELL and SWDs status. In class strategy- Increase math work time of students 20 minutes. Math discussion protocols (math conferences, misconception checks, group assessments) CCAT: Assessments are purposefully designed to motivate and challenge students and encompass students' learning styles and needs and are the prevalent method for assessment for learning at UA Gateway. They are used to demonstrate student mastery of a portion of the curriculum and evaluate a student’s standing. Both “authentic” and “creative” performance task assessments assess a student’s progress on specific skills/content. We use performance-task assessments as an approach to the monitoring of students' progress in relationship to learning outcomes. Teachers require students to create answers or products which demonstrate his/her knowledge or skills. Due to their open ended nature, performance task assessments allow for differentiation in products. Equity Lens in PD: Throughout the year, staff will participate in conversations about race and equity to frame the conversation around the work that we do. All staff All staf September 2018- June 2019 Targeted student support: Students will be supported through individual tracking coordinated by the Graduation Guardian coordinator and Regents Chief (person who manages support of students for regents exams) All students October 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Guidance, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our family engagement plan includes educating our families on how to support their children at home. 2018-19 CEP 20  The timeline around engaging families towards our Rigorous Instruction goal is below: September 2018- Introduction to Families 1) Share goal with families via Jupiter. Solicit feedback and questions. (Principal) 2) Share goal with families during first PA Meeting. (Principal, AP and Parent Coordinator). 3) Curriculum night structured through the lens of Common Core standards by the grade your child is in. Provide information about college readiness and the importance. (All staff) October 2018- Educating Families 1) Parent workshop- Run parent workshop around College Readiness index and the pathway from each year of school. What does this mean for a 9th grader, 10th grader etc. (Principal, Guidance, AP and Parent Coordinator) 2) Send home DEXPRO student profiles and Attendance Heatmap (Parent Coordinator, Guidance). 3) Update families on final CEP goals. 4) Invite families to come to Open School Day- see instruction in the classroom November 2018- Educating Families II 1) Parent workshop- Run parent workshop on data and attendance. (Principal, Guidance, AP and Parent Coordinator) 2) One pagers at PTC- how to support my child's road to college readiness. (Department leads, AP and Parent Coordinator) December 2018- Involving Families 1) Targeted calls to families of students who are not yet college ready (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 2) Reminder messages about Regents Tutoring. (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). January 2019- Involving Families II 1) Targeted calls to families of students who are not yet college ready (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 2) Reminder messages (Remind) about Regents Tutoring. (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). February 2019- Celebration 1) Targeted calls to families of students who sat for regents to attain college ready scores (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 2) Celebration for students who reach college readiness. (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 3) Send home DEXPRO student profiles and Attendance Heatmap (Parent Coordinator, Guidance). March 2019- Reassessment 2018-19 CEP 21  1) Share progress to goal with families via Jupiter. Solicit feedback and questions. (Principal) 2) Share progress to goal with families during PA Meeting. (Principal, AP and Parent Coordinator). April/May 2019- Involving Families III 1) Targeted calls to families of students who are not yet college ready (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 2) Reminder messages (Remind) about Regents Tutoring. (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). June 2019- Celebration II 1) Targeted calls to families of students who sat for regents to attain college ready scores (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). 2) Celebration for students who reach college readiness. (Parent Coordinator and Guidance). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Summer per session to develop writing rubric 10 hours per session  2 Teachers per session 20 Hours per teacher  7 Special Education Teachers salaries  One math teacher and one Special Ed teacher- all co taught Algebra classes   Per session for ELA to present PD 10 hours per session  Adjustment to grade team schedule to allow for Department Meetings  3 Math Teachers per session 30 hours each  Turnitin.com   Remind  DRP Administration and Planning  Per session to grade interim assessments  Per session for Regents Chief to track students retaking the exam  Per session for data specialist  Facilation of "I am Not Racist" PD Zipgrades Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will be at a college ready level of 78% in ELA and in Math Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 22  January 2019 Regents scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? UA Gateway is more than a school- it is a family. Family forgives you and welcomes you with open arms regardless. Our open practices over the years, while beneficial to supporting students and parents, have caused attendance to slip. In 16-17, our attendance was 88%. Therefore we focused on our attendance in 17-18. As a result of this work, we were able to elevate our attendance to 92% for the year. However, our strategy for increasing the percentage yearly was to focus on moving students at risk (90-95%) to not at risk (95% +) and by moving student severely chronically absent (less than 80%) to chronically absent (80-90%). This year, when looking deeper at the data, we realized our overall percentage of students above 90% overall attendance has remained the same- approximately 75%. Each student at Gateway receives a monthly report (RISA, Heat Map) that includes his or her attendance percentage(s), absences, latenesses for the month. Reports are distributed during one period of the day A list of students who have achieved perfect attendance is updated on the school television we would send grade wide Jupiter blasts to families with grade attendance percentages & encouragement to attend school daily. When students who have been absent return to school, they are welcomed back and guidance works with them to develop a plan for success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment: By June, 2019, we will effectively engage with families around the impact of attendance on student achievement, and will build students' sense of responsibility for their leaning, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of students with 90% and above attendance, from 75% to 80% and maintaining an average yearly attendance rate of 92%. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 -June 2019 4 Guidance Counselors for each grade Lowest 3rd in each grade and students who miss learning targets Sept 2018 -June 2019 All last period UAG teachers Students who do not reach learning targets in classes daily Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Academic Counseling: Led by 4 Guidance Counselors based on greatest student need. Lowest third students will be seen weekly/bi weekly in individual counseling sessions our small group sessions with their academic counselor. Academic counseling continue to be increased for students in greatest need as progress reports are generated biweekly. Counseling will occur during the school day to goal set, organize notes and set goals around assignments, clean out book bags, email teachers, review Jupiter and peer tutor/support. GOLD: Our after school tutoring GOAL Oriented Learning and Development, is our support system for remediation and enrichment. Through GOLD, teachers identify between 1 and 5 students who are not meeting at least 70% learning targets with proficiency. Students are asked to meet with teachers during the appropriate GOLD period. In this way, teachers have a structured time to meet with students in each of their classes, and students who are not meeting learning targets in multiple classes can meet with all necessary teachers. This systemized structure prevents students from “slipping through the cracks.” With intentional scheduling, no struggling students will go for more than one week without targeted teacher support. Students who are meeting and exceeding learning targets may also meet with teachers for enrichment activities. By design, G.O.L.D. requires us to identify exactly what students are struggling with in each class. If a student is struggling in three out of five classes, at least two days a week, they are engage in enrichment activities. If a student is struggling in all classes, accommodations will be made to make sure that they also are a part of the enrichment activities for a portion of their week. GOLD is a CONVERSATION between a teacher and a few 2018-19 CEP 25  students. Homework Help is an extension of GOLD. Whereas GOLD focuses on teachers helping students, Homework Help, which occurs after GOLD, is about students helping students. Teacher Instruction: Teachers will begin making instructional shifts on approaching students who have been absent. All students Sept 2018- June 2019 All teachers 1) Immediate contact from text/calls/Jupiter 2) No summative assignments due during 11th hour week 3) Spiralled curriculum Restorative Circles: Each week, students who are struggling academically are selected to have lunch with their teachers to build relationships and discuss their needs. The lunch is informal, light and the focus is to connect the student to their teachers. Teachers learn strategies to use with students from one another and get to see the student engaging with other teachers. One student group per week per grade Sept 2018-June 2019 The 4 Grade Guidance Counselors Late Calls: Daily late and absent calls go out via messenger to homes All students Daily All students Daily Data specialist & parent coordinator Teachers, Admin will log in and check Jupiter records biweekly, Parent coordinator will track parent log ins. All students, specific focus on <90% group September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Guidance, Admin, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker Communication: We will continue to use Jupiter and ATS for attendance and frequent communication and updates. Teachers will update Jupiter biweekly. Parents and students will keep track of progress in each class. The system also allows parents and students to email teachers with questions and concerns to teachers. This tool is also used to email teachers about questions on assignments. The principal will use Jupiter to communicate informal and formal announcements. We will provide Jupiter training at all open house events. In addition, school tours and audits of classes are conducted for any parents that wants to come to the school during the school day. Updated Attendance Plan that includes all but is not limited to- Each student at Gateway receives a monthly report (RISA, Heat Map) that includes his or her attendance percentage(s), absences, latenesses for the month. A list of students who have achieved perfect attendance is updated on the school television during the first week of every new month of the school year. Grade wide emails via Jupiter are send to families with grade attendance percentages & encouragement to attend school daily. Every Monday, calls go out for perfect attendance week prior and for latenesses week prior. Students are made aware of grade vs grade attendance war via morning and afternoon announcements throughout the month. The grade with the best attendance for the month will receive possession of the ‘attendance trophy’ in their classroom and are considered having won the “battle” for the month. The school is 2018-19 CEP 26 updated on the advancement of the attendance battle via school television and morning announcements. Tiered response system to absences. Home Visits: Home visits will be done for all incoming freshmen, with specific attention to students at risk with attendance. Additionally, throughout the year, based on need, guidance or parent coordinator or attendance teacher will visit the homes of students who are struggling with attendance Incoming Freshmen, students with at risk attendance August 2018 - May 2019 Teachers, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, Admin, Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. August 2018 1) Visit the homes of all incoming freshmen and discuss attendance with families. September 2018 1) The the administrative team will communicate with parents by sharing with them the goals for the year. Parents will be provided with a series of questions they can ask their children daily after school to support their immersion in learning. Throughout the year 2) Weekly updates will be sent out to parents via Jupiter, including updates on our goal progress. Each update has ownership of learning piece (Principal) October 2018/November 2018 1) Conduct two parent workshops- Attendance and Data (Admin) and Having Difficult Conversations with Your Kids. (Social Worker) 2) Invite families to come to Open School Day and Grade Values celebrations (Parent Coordinator) 3) Create a volunteer opportunity forum for parents. (Parent Coordinator) December 2018-April 2019 1) Invite families to come to Open School Day and Core/Grade Values celebrations (Parent Coordinator) 2) Targeted home visits based on attendance (Guidance, Attendance teacher). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Jupiter Salaries for 4 guidance counselors and one social worker   GOLD per session for Guidance counselors 100 hours of per session total  Check of Jupiter   Per session for data specialist  Home Visit per session  Funds set aside for awards for attendance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance will be 94% and 80% of students will have above 90% attendance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS, Heatmap, Dexpro Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our most recent QR in 2016 cited Teacher Teams as our area of celebration. It stated: The vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based collaborations that strengthen school- wide practices and promote the Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams analyze key elements of their practice and assessment data for students they share. The work of teacher teams results in school-wide instructional coherence, increased student achievement for all learners, and mastery of goals for groups of students. We seek to build on this culture defining element of our school by extending our collaboration to daily lessons and coplanning. This will allow practices from highly effective teachers to go across disciplines. We believe teacher collaboration leads to strengthened curriculum and student achievement as evidenced by 81% pass rates on the ELA Regents , 92% pass rates on the Global History and 94% pass rate on the US History regents, 90% pass rate on the Living Environment, and 83% pass rates for the Earth Science regents. Our credit accumulation is strong. On average 97% of students earn credits annually and 94% of students are promoted to the next grade. The next step for Gateway is not for students to pass, but to pass with mastery. Prioritizing a higher GPA also allows students to keep their options open when it comes to college choices. Additionally, we expect this to lead to higher SAT scores, higher regents scores and greater enrollment in AP classes. To allow this to occur, we have put an emphasis on collaboration between teachers. There are thirty partnerships at Gateway. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers: By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration will lead to improved student achievement, as evidenced by a 5% increase in average student GPA, from 80% to 85%. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Peer observations will be logged and tracked on TeachBoost. TeachBoost is an evaluation and feedback web platform designed to engage teachers and administrators in an ongoing, dialogue and feedback that fosters the professional development. The site is a platform to creating opportunities for meaningful interactions among teachers and administrators through the collaborative portal. TeachBoost is a safe space for teachers to collaborate with, and learn from, their peers, encouraging a culture of shared responsibility and collective success. The goal is to encourage breakthrough professional learning moments that result will in successful, sustainable improvements in teaching and learning. Instructional Rounds- All teachers at UA Gateway take part in the rounds process outlined by the Steering Commitee. Team Alignment- During department time, teachers will engage in a team alignment protocol. Lesson planning in PD: During department meetings this year, teachers will work together and provide feedback to one another . Teachers receive feedback and fine-tune their development of lesson planning and student assessment. In the protocol, teachers share student work, with colleagues and reflect on lessons. The collaborative reflection helps educators design and refine their assessments systems and supports higher level student work. The presenting teacher may bring samples of either their own or student work. They may also bring video, rubrics, any other created materials, texts, etc., to support student performance. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership and UAG Administration All teachers November 2018 - May 2019 Targeted Students. lowest third, SWDs, ELLs September 2018- June 2019 All students September 2018- June 2019 All teachers All teachers Instructional Leadership, Steering Committee and UAG Administration and Department Leads Restorative Circles: During Grade team meeting, staff work together to build close relationships with various groups of students who are both struggling and flourishing, and learn Struggling Students determined September 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselors 2018-19 CEP 30 by weekly guidance meetings All students September 2018- June 2019 Algebra, Geometry, Global, US History, ELA, and ICT Teachers All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration All teachers September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers All Staff All Staff September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers All Staff All Administration strategies on how to reach our most challenging students. They also work with Guidance Counselors to learn more about the students to bring out their brilliance, talent and treasure. Restorative Circles happen 4 days per week, Monday through Thursday during student lunch. Post the circles, teachers may decide to visit each other's classrooms to observe specific students. Lesson Planning and alignment through common planning and ICT planning. Like courses at UAG are aligned through teacher collaboration during common planning time. All like courses taught by different teachers are aligned. This planning allows for teachers to share lesson plans, align assessments, share data and strategies. Teachers plan and present PD and Interim data. All teachers at UA Gateway plan professional development and present student data at least once per year to staff members. Expert teacher present on their strengths, which have included: checks for understanding, flipped classroom, technology in the classroom, common core in non-ELA classes, etc. Newer teachers may present their journey in any area of teaching and learning. Staff Work Area: teaching can be very isolating, especially in high school as teachers are often prepping during their free period or may teach different content/grades. At UAG room 754 is the teacher work area where teachers go for preparation. Teachers encourage one another to work in the area. It is a place to share ideas, decompress, and provide feedback. Teachers at UAG often say that it is in this space where they get some of the best ideas. UAG practices relational systems that keep UAG Safe and Toxic Free: UAG Staff are committed to using systems that keep our space open to feedback, professional and honest. As such we use three systems that demand honesty from all members. The protocols in place for conversation are Dyads, Courageous Conversations, and Learning Conversations. Since our inception, UAG has aimed to create a culture of critical friends. Our first structure the dyad, serves to help staff when they just need an ear to listen. The dyad ia a safe space to become better at listening and talking in depth. Dyads help us as we work through feelings, thoughts, and beliefs that sometimes produce anger, passivity, undermine confidence, or cause interference in relationships with students or colleagues. The benefit of the talker who may just need someone to listen. A courageous conversation is an effective tool that we can to resolve relational conflicts. Most people don’t feel safe enough to talk about their deepest needs and fears, because they know that few people are willing to try to listen from another person’s perspective. A courageous conversation creates an atmosphere of patient listening that blends the elements of kindness and truth, with the purpose of facilitating deeper communication. A courageous conversation often comes up without any invitation or planning. Learning Conversations occur when UAG members need longer periods of time to work through issues. All UAG members are 2018-19 CEP 31  challenged to participate in these challenging conversation. We practice these systems frequently and hold one another Steering Committee: The cabinet meets biweekly to discuss and evaluate: student data, school-wide data, peer observations, teacher support, professional development, morale, upcoming events, implementation of core values, and our goals. The cabinet serves as a representative group but also a planning group that responds to school needs. The Steering Committee will work together to decide on the priorities of our school and to manage the general course of its operations. This is to ensure full transparency of all that goes on in this building! Instructional Leadership: The Instructional Team! This team is committed to strong instructional strategies and teacher development. Members of the team are going to be working as mentors at UAG and through the meetings will develop their skills for mentoring. The goal of the team is to learn methods for providing feedback that people can receive and creating a positive symbiotic relationship with their mentee! UAG U- As a part of targeted and differentiated professional development, UAG will be running modular professional development courses. Each module would be centered around a focus and several sessions long to allow for coherence and immersion. Regardless of the course selected, there will be some shared experiences across courses. All who matriculate will receive: qualified facilitators with a proven track record of success or reflection, field work opportunities, and research/planning time with peer support. Data Analysis: Teachers will work together to analyze data each marking period Student Support Committee- Weekly guidance and administrative and support team meetings to look at student data week to week 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Department Leads September 2018-June 2019 All Administration Mentors August 2018-June 2019 Administration and Department Leads All students All teachers September 2018- June 2019 All students, focus on SWDs and ELLs All students, focus on SWDs and ELLs September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Admin, teachers, guidance Admin, Guidance How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018 1) The administrative team will communicate with parents by sharing with them the goals for the year. 2018-19 CEP 32  Throughout the year 2) Weekly updates will be sent out to parents via Jupiter, including updates on our goal progress. Each update has ownership of learning piece (Principal) 3) Invite families to come to Open School Day- see instruction in the classroom (Parent Coordinator) 4) Parent workshop- Run parent workshop around "So You Want Your Kid to go to Their #1 College Choice"- Part 1 and Part 2 (Principal, Guidance, AP and Parent Coordinator) 5) Ability to see teacher ratings via DOE Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Assistant principal to conduct weekly observations with Principal - Remind - Jupiter -Purchase Teachboost -Per Session for additional planning and alignment -Instructional Leadership and Steering 80 Hours of per session -Per Session for teachers to plan UAG U -Albert IO -Teacher salary with Strategic programming to allow for more cotaught classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, average student GPA, as evidenced by Marking Period 1, 2 and 3 data since UAG is an annualized school, will be 88% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Jupiter, STARS, Dexpro 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administrators at UAG treat the observation of teaching and learning as our first priority. We observe all teachers weekly to provide feedback, offer support and share best practices with whole staff through professional development. We are always eager to learn from best practices and try new and innovative ways to increase student achievement. We seek to build on this culture defining element of our school by extending our collaboration to daily lessons and coplanning. We believe teacher collaboration leads to strengthened curriculum and student achievement as evidenced by 81% pass rates on the ELA Regents , 92% pass rates on the Global History and 94% pass rate on the US History regents, 90% pass rate on the Living Environment, and 83% pass rates for the Earth Science regents. Through effective leadership decisions and planning, pairing teachers strategically should have the same impact on teachers. This will allow practices from highly effective teachers to go across disciplines. When looking at the ratings of our teachers last year in, it is clear instruction (along with culture) is a pillar of Gateway. The collaboration over the years has been successful, resulting in effective and highly effective planning across departments. When looking at end of year MOTP ratings, 85% of our teachers were rated Highly Effective or Effective. When looking just at Domain 3 of MOTP, the Highly Effective and Effective percentage dips slightly to 75%. Upon investigating individual domains and ratings, we can see that Domain 3 is the next area for us to bring to Highly Effective. Overall, the average teacher rating was 2.87 in Domain 3. When comparing each of the components within Domain 3, the average for 3B was 2.94, the average for 3C was 2.94 and the average for 3C was 2.74. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective Leaders: By June 2019, effective leadership through creation of UAG U, effective coplanning and instructional rounds, will lead to strengthened teacher practice, as evidenced by a 5% increase in teacher ratings in Domain 3, from average of 2.87 to 3.00. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly Observations & Observational Rounds- administration will develop a cyclical approach to observations at Gateway to ensure we are always closing the feedback loop. All teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers will receive feedback in one of four ways: Coaching, Evaluative, Residency or Performance Practice. Clarity through common language on type of feedback and support will create a coherency among principal and assistant principal. Principal and AP will conduct all evaluative observations together. Norming- administration will observe teach initially for norming and to provide teachers with feedback around trends across the departments Reflection Ritual- All professional development will similar reflection questions UAG U- As a part of targeted and differentiated professional development, UAG will be running modular professional development courses. Each module would be centered around a focus and several sessions long to allow for coherence and immersion. Regardless of the course selected, there will be some shared experiences across courses. All who matriculate will receive: qualified facilitators with a proven track record of success or reflection, field work opportunities, and research/planning time with peer support. Survey- Get feedback on successes and struggles for program coherence as well as new initiatives Steering Committee: The cabinet meets biweekly to discuss and evaluate: student data, school-wide data, peer observations, teacher support, professional development, morale, upcoming events, implementation of core values, and our goals. The cabinet serves as a representative group but also a planning group that responds to school needs. The Steering Committee will work together to decide on the priorities of our school and to manage the general course of its operations. This is to ensure full transparency of all that goes on in this building! All teachers September 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers targeted for sections October 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal All staff All teachers Ongoing Principal Department Leads September 2018- June 2019 Principal 2018-19 CEP 36 Instructional Leadership: The Instructional Team! This team is committed to strong instructional strategies and teacher development. Members of the team are going to be working as mentors at UAG and through the meetings will develop their skills for mentoring. The goal of the team is to learn methods for providing feedback that people can receive and creating a positive symbiotic relationship with their mentee! Mentors September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal, Principal Professional Development Calendar- Each session is supported by data points all teachers ongoing Instructional leadership and Steering Committee UAG Weekly: Weekly newsletter will be emailed out to communicate upcoming programs and trends all staff weekly Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018 1) The administrative team will communicate with parents by sharing with them the goals for the year. Throughout the year 2) Weekly updates will be sent out to parents via Jupiter, including updates on our goal progress. Each update has ownership of learning piece (Principal) 3) Invite families to come to Open School Day- see instruction in the classroom (Parent Coordinator) 4) Parent workshops- Run parent workshops regularly. (Principal, Guidance, AP and Parent Coordinator) 5) Ability to see teacher ratings via DOE 6) Parent volunteer opportunities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Instructional Cabinet per session - Assistant principal to conduct weekly observations with Principal - Remind 2018-19 CEP 37  - Smore for weekly newsletter - Jupiter -Purchase Teachboost -Per Session for additional planning and alignment -Instructional Leadership and Steering 80 Hours of per session -Per Session for teachers to plan UAG U Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teacher ratings will be Highly Effective or Effective in Domain 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachboost & Danielson, monitored via Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At UAG, we work hard to maintain communication with our parents. We communicate on a daily basis with parents through Jupiter, Messenger calls, text blasts and personal phone calls. On average, we would hold 3-4 events a month that parents can attend. However recently we have noticed a few trends. Firstly, we continue getting the same parents to attend events. There is a large percentage of parents who have never attended a school event. Secondly, we want to shift our communication with parents from informative, reactive and negative to celebratory, proactive and positive. (For example: rather than calling to let parents know their child was late, absent, struggling academically, we also want to call our parents to congratulate them for their child receiving a Core Value Award). By increasing our positive communication with parents we hope to increase our parent attendance at events. In the 2017-2018 school year, our average attendance at Parent- Teacher Conferences was 205 parents (48% of the school) and our average attendance at events was 20 parents (less than 5% of the school). In the 2017-2018 school year, 52% of the parents participated in an event at UAG at least once. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong Family and Community Ties: By June 2019, we will deepen our partnership with families and empower parents as effective advocates for their child's success, as evidenced by an increase of 10% in families’ attendance in school sponsored events or involvement in an event or iniative at the school from 52% of the families participating at least once to 62% of the families. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Events: UAG will continue engaging events and opportunities for community. These traditions include: All UAG students and families. September 2018-June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator Partnership Coordinator Social Worker Teachers 1. Thankcake 2. Meet the Staff Night 3. Senior College Night 4. 6 Orientations 5. Home visits to all incoming families in the summer 6. College Night 7. Dances 8. The Amazing Race 9. Broadway Plays We will also improve our model with: 1. Family Movie Night 2. Working closely with the PA 3. Parent Moth night 4. Mixers with Staff 5. Open School Days 6. Paint Night 7. Weekly Parent letter 2018-19 CEP 40  8. Community Fundraising for our school 9. 48 hour policy in parent communication 10. Carnival from the community 11. Parent Circles 12. Parent Involvement Cards Communication: We will continue to use Jupiter and ATS for attendance and frequent communication and updates. Teachers will update Jupiter biweekly. Parents and students will keep track of progress in each class. The system also allows parents and students to email teachers with questions and concerns to teachers. This tool is also used to email teachers about questions on assignments. The principal will use Jupiter to communicate informal and formal announcements. We will provide Jupiter grades training at all open house events. In addition, school tours and audits of classes are conducted for any parents that wants to come to the school during the school day. Parent Volunteerism (one hour per year): This year UAG is asking all families to donate one hour of service this year. Volunteerism can look like: escorting students on their community service assignments, chaperoning, hosting events, fundraising, etc. Parents will sign up via spots sent through Jupiter General Outreach: ● Increased written communication to parents via Jupiter and Remind ● Introduce parents to online resources (Archipelago Learning, Khan Academy) that can be reached from home and that they can use with their child to help them study ● Parent handbook outlines the UAG polices and resources ● Parent Newsletter goes out every month to inform parents of the latest at the school ● Principal’s parent letter addresses the most pressing issues weekly All UAG parents All Staff September 2018-June 2019 All UAG parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator Partnership Coordinator Social Worker All UAG parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Partnership Coordinator Parent Workshops: High interest discussion series with our Guidance Counselors, Social worker and administration around the following topics All UAG Parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker and Guidance Counselor 1. How to Prepare and Pay for College Grade 9-11 2018-19 CEP 41 2. Senior College Night Grade 12 3. How to Talk to Your Child about Sex 4. How to Talk to Your Teenager About Drugs 5. How to Discuss Divorce and Single Parent hood with Your Child Importance of attendance 6. Parent Coordinator Tracker: Use of tracker for logging communication and events All UAG families Weekly throughout the year Parent Coordinator, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. GCSA, BBBS, and we are seeking additional for our Parent Workshop Series Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator to plan and host parent events and open houses - Funding for over 20 student events including ( Amazing Race, Thankcake, Fashion show, etc) - Home visit per session during the summer for teachers and guidence - Per session to plan and implement 5 high interest discussion series with parents - Parent Coordinator to plan and coordinate parent volunteering plan - Remind, Jupiter, Messenger - Per Session for Family Engagement Advisor - Constant Contact and Smore software for weekly blog Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, UAG average parent participation will be 57% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 42  Google Drive data tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8 th grade exams Performance on summative assessments 8 th grade exams and performance on regents June 2018 score on Mathermatics regents Performance on in class summative assessments , Interim Assessments Performance on class summative assessments, Interim Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Gateway to Reading Period withLeazer Small class 1-16 During the school day Advisoryperiod with Cummings , Small class 1-16 During the school day . Saturday Math Academy GOLD (After School tutoring) 11 th Hour GOLD Academic Counseling GOLD (After School tutoring) 11 th Hour GOLD Small Group 1-5 Students Daily in Living Env, Earth Science, Chemistry, Physics, AP BIo and AP Chemistry Small Group 1-5 Students in Global Studies, US History, Government, and Economics Saturdays Afterschool During Lunch Saturdays Afterschool During lunch Saturdays Afterschool During lunch Saturdays Academic Counseling Anecdotals Taste of History Restorative Circles Small Group 1-8 Students Suspension data Academic Counseling Attendance data Counseling with Social Worker At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 44  Jupiter Passing Data Group Counseling Hiking trips Restorative Justice Mediations Clubs Fairness Council UAG Community Service 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Individual Counseling, group counseling, backpacks filled with school supplies, school hoodies, pajamas, winter clothing. Gift cards for clothes, school supplies, books, winter coats. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title One school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  See above 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Does not apply 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for increased teacher quality 1. The search for teachers begins one year before the teacher is hired. 2. We get most of our teacher is by referral system of teachers at UA Gateway. Referred teachers have been seen by other teachers who can speak to a candidate's work ethic, love for students and passion. 3. Teachers are observed before hiring and even before an interview. Staff, Admin and students observe the teacher in a mock classroom and then offer feedback to engage in a dialogue about teaching and learning. 5. Candidates then answer scenario questions that address socio-emotional issues and assess a candidates journey with Love and Logic. The hiring committee then reviews, interviews and hires teachers based on a rigorous interview process. 6. All teacher references are checked. 7. Once hired, teachers new to UAG receive mentoring the summer before their hire. 8. All teachers teach within their licenses. 9. All teachers attend the student Gate-Away and then the staff Gate-Away to become acclimated to UAG culture. 10. Each new teacher is assigned a UAG teacher mentor 11. Staff receive weekly administrative observations with feedback. 12. Power Academy, our professional development series, is based on observations, needs and trends across the school. 2018-19 CEP 48  13. All teachers participate in the peer observation process. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Shared Understanding of Effective Instruction before the first day of school: At UA Gateway we have developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through a number of institutionalized systems and practices. All new teachers at Gateway meet with a member of the administration staff independently at the beginning of the year to discuss the Gateway Instructional Guide, a guide written by the admin team in consultation with the teaching staff to provide clear expectations for each department with regard to our beliefs of what we teach, how we teach and how students learn best. Within the Gateway Instructional Guide there are models and templates that clearly demonstrate the expectations with regard to target development, lesson planning, and instruction. As a staff, we work in the summer at our annual staff retreat to review and discuss the major text that guide our beliefs on how students learn and grow best with particular emphasis on Dweck, Marzano, Danielson, Schmoker and Reeves. Shared Understanding of Effective Instruction at the beginning of the year: To further norm our understanding of effective instruction, the administrative team meets with every staff member to review the Danielson Framework and help teachers reflect on and select a key leverage area for growth and development throughout the year. After having teachers develop a plan and focus for the year, the administrative team present our Quality Review Data, Assessment Data and Classroom Observation Data to the staff and provided our instructional foci for the year as well as our plan for professional development (Power Academy) to support our instructional foci. Shared Understanding of Effective Instruction sustained through the year: Throughout the year we have committed our collective efforts to meeting our foci and attaining greater student achievement through the following: ● Each teacher is observed weekly by a member of the administrative team. They are provided with oral and written feedback based on Danielson, which is logged into Teachboost or Advance. ● Each week during Power Academy (our weekly professional development series) we delve into one of the instructional foci. Each week’s theme in Power Academy is determined by trends and deficiencies noticed in the prior week’s observations. To allow for differentiation, teachers run PD through UAG U, a course approach to PD. ● In department meetings, teachers use the alignment protocol to address classroom problems of practice and look at student work. During Interim seasons, teachers present data and student performance on predictives and student progress towards the Common Core State Standards. 2018-19 CEP 49  ● In January, all teachers meet with a member of the administrative team for a mid-year check-in where we review their overall performance, student data and progress to their personal growth plan and set goals for growth and improvement for the remainder of the year. Shared Understanding of Effective Instruction at the year’s end: In June, teachers receive an end-of-year conference with an administrator to discuss the year’s final progress and growth. As a staff, we review the preliminary end-of-year data (assessments, observations, etc.) to begin defining our goals for the year ahead. As we approach the summer, we use our reflective work at the end of the year to begin the cycle of a shared understanding of effective instruction for the year ahead. Every week, teachers are observed and rated using the Danielson Framework for Teaching by a member of the admin team. Teachers have a set meeting time with an admin member to reflect on their teaching practice through protected meeting time to review observed lessons. In January, all teachers meet with a member of the administrative team for a mid-year check-in where we review their overall performance, student data and progress to their personal growth plan and set goals for growth and improvement for the remainder of the year. Professional Development is based on needs assessments after weekly observation, through peer observations and the Instructional Leadership Team. UAG U caters to teacher individual needs and trends across the school via observations Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 50  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers design assessments for their courses. They collaborate with administration for interims and predictive assessments. The Gateway Instructional Guide outlines how assessments are given and graded at UAG. The systems/structures in place for involving teachers in decision making regarding the professional development provided to ensure the use of assessment results include interim data presentations which are developed by teachers four times during the school-year. In this presentation, teachers do item analysis on multiple choice questions, short answers and essays that appear on state assessments. They develop a reteaching plan based on the assessment results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal $214,572 $0 $0 $0 X 2018-19 CEP 51 Column B Section Reference(s) Gate-Away, Staff Retreat, Jupiter grades, college trips, etc. mentioned in action plans referenced above  Tax Levy (FSF) Local $3,591,689 X Salaries mentioned in Action plans for the five Goals 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 52   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 53  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 54  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting t of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 55  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Parent events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently;  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 56   Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by:  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   2018-19 CEP 57   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Parents of the graduating class of 2021 will commit to one hour of community service at our school during the 2017-2018 school year to meet our school’s goal of increased family engagement. III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  Show respect for myself, other people and property;   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Urban Assembly Gateway School for Tech Borough Manhattan School Number 507 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kristina Dvorakovskaya Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mina Leazer/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Davenport/English Teacher/Subject Area Marvin Gruszka/Science Related-Service Provider Gabriela Marquez Canale Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Corinth Hunter Coach - School Counselor Alex Rigney Parent Diana Sanchez Parent Coordinator Greisys Feliz Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 481 Total number of ELLs 9 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In addition to the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments, Urban Asssembly Gateway School for Technology (UAG) uses the following assessments for determining the early literacy skills of our ELLs: -Degrees of Reading Protocol: The DRP measures the students’ abilities to decode text, and persevere through different Lexile ranges of text. -Measures of Student Learning Assessment: The MOSL is administered twice yearly and measures the students ability to incorporate non-fiction reading into a comprehensive argumentative essay based on a pre-determined prompt. -In-house writing assessment: This assessment is administered three times a year in line with the Judith Hochman Teaching Basic Writing Skills in order to assess the students’ ability to compose a written essay in response to a given text. 2018-19 CEP 61  The data from these three assessments show that our ELLs struggle the most with reading and writing assessments that focus on deep synthesis of data. Some of our ELLs struggle more on the comprehension level of texts, but a greater number of our ELLs remain below grade level in their reading and writing. This data also helps to inform our instruction to be deeply literacy-based across the entire curriculum. Scaffolds in reading and writing are provided across the subject areas requiring students to engage in various types of texts and to write often. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our DRP exams are scheduled into our English program during Interims week at UAG. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of the programs we implement for ELLs, we carefully monitor their progress from week to week, and include a pre-test and post-test for each assessment. The ESL teacher and assistant principal meet weekly in order assess the academic progress of our ELLs in each of their classes. An action plan is made for that week for different academic interventions that can be put into place in order to improve their progress. The ESL teacher also meets weekly with each ELL to discuss his/her academic progress, and a conference record is kept so that students can chart their weekly goals. Periodic assessments are also made for our ELLs. They take the DRP (see question 1) three times per year as a measure of their literacy growth. The MOSL is given twice per year as a way of charting their independent ability to interpret and synthesize readings. Finally, the in-house writing assessment is given three times a year to chart their growth as writers. The ELL and ELA team collaborate to chart the ELL students’ progress on these assessments, and if there is little to no change, we will modify how we are administering these programs or make decisions to change the program itself. For example, three years ago, we experimented with the online blended learning program Achieve 3000 to help students with their literacy. While the guarantee of the program was that students who committed to forty sessions would be guaranteed to raise their Lexile reading level by one grade level, we found the students’ growth to be minimal from month-to-month, even when they were actively participating in the the regimen. A decision was made to discontinue this program this year in favor of a sustained reading period that would be incorporated into the students’ schedules. The measure of this success will be reflected in their DRP scores. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We ensure our English team can meet 12 times a year as a department. Four of these meetings are dedicated to analyzing the data from the DRP and to create a responsive plan. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] UAG does not implement the Response to Intervention framework at this time due to our use of other supports for ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns from the NYSESLAT reveal that our ELLs are typically stronger in Speaking and Listening than they are in Reading and Writing. Of those four modalities, input modalities, Listening and Reading, pose more challenges than output ones, speaking and writing, although writing still remains the largest challenge among the four. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of each year, we present all of our student data, including ELL data, in our State of the Union address to staff. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Beginning in the 2015-16 school year, ELLs were required to receive all or part of their ENL through an integrated model, which refers to a unit of study or its equivalent in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction. The integrated ENL along with a subject area taught are dependent upon the student’s proficiency level. In grades 9 to 12, at the entering and emerging levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided; at the transitioning and expanding levels, the integrated ENL is with any content area that best meets the need of the student. UAG has determined that the integrated ENL best fits the need of our students who range from Emerging to Expanding. Students are accordingly placed in an integrated ENL class of ELA, Reading Class, Global History or US History. The ENL teacher also teaches two sections of stand alone ENL so that students in the emerging and transitioning categories may receive their minimum 90 minutes of ENL instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher works in conjunction with the programming team to ensure that each student is serviced by an ENL professional within the required minutes of his/her proficiency level. This changes from year to year, but generally, an Expanding student receives one class of ENL stand alone instruction along with one class of ELA. In our current schedule this means that an Expanding ELL student receives 225 total minutes of ENL instruction and 225 total minutes of ELA instruction a week. In the same manner, our Emerging ELL students see an ESL teacher at least two times a day, and and ELA teacher at least once per day. In our current model, an Emerging ELL receives 450 total minutes of stand alone and integrated ENL per week. If we were to have Entering ELLs at our school we would be able to service them in the current model due to the excess of mandated minutes of service we are able to provide. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since we use a combination of an integrated and stand-alone ENL at UAG, ELL students are mainstreamed into the same classes as their cohort. Their ENL instruction is delivered in the core content classes which require the most supports in literacy: US History, Global History, Chemistry, Reading and English. The content teachers collaborate with the ENL teacher to 2018-19 CEP 63  make the same content given to non-ELL students comprehensible for the ELL students. This involves a wide range of supports. The ENL teacher is there to make sure that students obtain all input, scaffold instruction, use graphic organizers, provide bilingual supports. The ENL teacher essentially specializes in tailoring the content for the ELL students in the class to make sure they are able to obtain the same Common Core Learning Standards as their non-ELL peers. This may be done with modifications, and in a longer period of time. In all programs, a variety of content teacher and ENL teacher-chosen material is used. Resources from EngageNY, educational publishing companies, novels, textbooks, and teacher-generated material is used to support instruction in the class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are given the opportunity to take all assessments in their native language when requested. If the assessments are spoken or written, they are allowed to write in their native language. Alternatively, if students would like to use a bilingual glossary so they can attempt their responses in English, they are given this accommodation in addition to extra time to complete these tasks. We are also investigating standardized screeners which could be used as regular assessments to evaluate home language performance throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: For our SIFE students, we have a very intense one-on-one component in addition to the integrated model available to all ELLs. SIFE students’ progress is monitored weekly, and conferences are held with the student to make sure they know what is required of to succeed. The ENL teacher maintains close communication with the teachers of SIFE students to ensure that they are staying for extra help, and also communicating needs that the SIFE students have to met in order to be successful. b. Newcomers: Our newcomers are monitored in a similar fashion, though a more general and holistic approach is given to their instruction. The ENL teacher also monitors the newcomers’ progress in all their academic classes and conferences with them on a weekly basis to make sure they are maintaining their progress. c. Developing: For the Developing ELLs, close attention is paid to their initial assessments for the year. This is to determine if a particular modality is weaker than the others. From there, a specific plan is made by the ENL teacher in conjunction with the student to specifically target the weaker modalities of the Developing students. Typically, we find that students at this point are stronger in listening and speaking, and struggle with reading and writing. Because of this, teachers are given tools and accommodations to implement across the curriculum for these students. The ENL push-in period is when the ENL teacher can monitor progress with these linguistic goals. d. Long Term: The strategy applied to the Long Term year students is similar to the one used with the Developing students. At this point, the ENL team also evaluates other factors which may be at work. If, after a year of targeted interventions, the Developing students are not improving in their modalities, we also begin to look at whether or not there are learning disabilities or speech impairments which are hindering their progression. Most of the Developing students at our school have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). When these are up for review, we will conduct a special review will be made to come up with a formalized plan to help the Developing students progress. e. F-ELLs: The former ELLs at UAG are given special accommodations in accordance with the accommodations they receive 2018-19 CEP 64  on official state assessments. They can use bilingual glossaries and receive time and a half on any assessments they take in class. Teachers are also made aware of former ELLs status and have access to their old accommodations if they deem them necessary in their classroom. They are also mandated to receive 90 minutes of week of ELL services for two years after testing out of the program, and are scheduled alongside our emerging ELLs to receive the appropriate amount of integrated ENL hours. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELL students with disabilities, teachers use a variety of scaffolded materials to ensure their success. One particular method we have adopted across the content areas is the Judith Hochman Teaching Basic Writing Skills. This method is a step-by-step structured program which allows ELL-SWDs access to the content area writing they are required to do in all of their classes. This program provides basic supports from sentence-writing, to paragraph-length writing and full essays through the use of outlines and structured activities. These supports range from Grade 6-12 supports. For reading, uniform practices are applied across the content areas for annotating text and taking Cornell Notes. This uniformity allows our ELL-SWDs to access the content area material as well as improve their language comprehension skills. Cornell notes are introduced in 9 th grade and continue to be used as supports into 12 th grade. Home language glossaries and dictionaries are used as well as online translators and dictionaries, such as wordreference.com and translate.google.com. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELL-SWDs at UAG are mainstreamed into the regular curriculum of their grade cohort, and the ENL teacher and the Special Education teacher move to meet them in their classes and ensure their ELL and IEP goals. The support may come in different classes and content areas in accordance with the specifics of their IEPs and ELL language goals. The ENL teacher and the Special Education team communicate regularly to ensure these students are meeting their goals. This year, we have our ESL teacher pushing into one of the ICT English 9 classes to meet the needs of our population. Every year, compliance in both ENL and IEPs are reviewed by the Special Education department and the ENL teacher. Each student who is classified as an ELL SWD is hand-reviewed to ensure this his/her schedule matches the requirements of the Individualized Education Plan and ENL requirements for stand alone and integrated ENL. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA: An ENL integrated program is used in ELA to scaffold the literature component of this course. A sustained reading program is set in place so that ELLs have access to a literacy-rich environment for a required number of minutes a day (25-40 minutes). The Judith Hochman Teaching Basic Writing Skills method is used to ensure that ELLs have explicit instruction on how sentences, paragraphs and essays are put together. Students then have guided practice time to use these tools. Math: All math content teachers are provided with the specific language goals of each ELL student in his/her classroom. Math is also being taught in a new group work method in which ELLs are placed with non-ELLs to actively speak and listen to their peers in order to engage in the learning. Math, which has typically been an individual experience for ELLs, is now incorporating the speaking and listening skills ELLs need. Science: A push-in program is used in Science to support the acquisition of new content vocabulary and and concepts. Cornell Notes are used to help students understand the lecture notes, and modified worksheets are made to supplement each lesson. A content teacher is available to reteach content when students do not reach the lesson targets, and an ENL teacher is available to ensure that students are able to express their thoughts in complete sentences and utterances. History: A push-in program is used in History to support the content material and vocabulary. The History teachers provide 2018-19 CEP 65  scaffolded notes sheets on which ELLs take notes. The ENL teacher is there to ensure that students are able to understand the concept through the use of bilingual translations or further clarification of vocabulary in simpler terms. Pair and group work is also used in History to make sure students are making active use of listening and speaking skills. The Judith Hochman Teaching Basic Writing Skills method is also used in this class to support the extended writing students must do. In all settings, home language can and may be used to scaffold instruction. As most materials used in our classrooms are teacher-made, we encourage use of Translation and Interpretation services to translate all fundamental documents. Also, in group work, use of home language is encouraged to enhance discussion participation and the like. We are also targeting the lowest third and ELL students based on 8 th grade ELA/Math scores and Regents and core class pass rates to deliberately place students in a literacy and numeracy remediation program designed to give students an extra period of targeted reading and math instruction in addition to their current ELA and Algebra courses. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, we are implementing a targeted literacy and numeracy program for our ELLs and struggling learners. This program provides an additional period of explicit reading and math instruction geared at making plain the skills that most push-in classes might assume ELLs to inherently know. By making these steps explicit, we are hoping to give ELLs the ability and opportunity to catch up on skill sets that were lagging in both numeracy and literacy. We are targeting the lowest third and ELL students based on 8th grade ELA/Math scores and Regents and core class pass rates to deliberately place students in a literacy and numeracy remediation program designed to give students an extra period of targeted reading and math instruction in addition to their current ELA and Algebra courses. We anticipate having 30 students in the Freshmen cohort enrolled in the numeracy program and the literacy program. This program will occur during the ninth grade advisory time. Based on the student performance on the DRP and ongoing in class assessments, students may be moved into and out of the class at the close of the marking periods. Due to the fact that many of our ELLs are also SWDs, we are programming both our Special Education teacher and our ENL teacher, for a cotaught English 9 class. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? One program we are no longer continuing is the online blended learning program called Achieve 3000. We piloted this program last year as a way to improve the reading levels of our ELLs, but we found that the model was not helpful for our ELLs. While some made small gains, the online model was not interactive enough for the students to have an enriching experience with their reading. We also found that the Lexile score gains were minimal, and the program itself, while differentiated, did not generate an enthusiasm for reading among our ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. It is our goal that all ELLs are included in all school programs to the maximum extent possible. This includes academic and extracurricular programming. Materials advertising these programs are available in English, Spanish and other languages, and the ENL teacher works closely with other teachers to ensure that students are given access to all after-school academic counseling and help sessions. One program we offer is GOLD - Goal Oriented Learning Development. When an ELL does not meet the learning target of the class that day, he/she will be invited to come to GOLD to focus on the content material for that day. This program is especially helpful because it occurs on a rotating basis, so that ELLs have the opportunity to meet one-on-one with the content teacher to address their specific needs. For all ELLs, the ENL teacher is also available to conference and set goals with the ELLs during GOLD. The ENL teacher also communicates with content teachers and the guidance counselors to ensure that ELLs are staying for GOLD. ELLs are invited to participate in all programs through personal teacher recommendation, school news presentations in advisory class, whole school announcements and via e-mail newsletters. ELLs are represented in a gamut of activities by their 2018-19 CEP 66  interests in internships, mentor programs, video games, skateboarding, sports, book club, etc. to name a few. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A combination of teacher-created materials and publisher-generated materials are used to support the instruction of our ELLs. All materials are made available in English and the students’ native languages when and where necessary. We use Google Translate to create these documents. When publishers provide native language texts in other languages, these materials are used in lieu of or to support the input of content material. Content teachers and the ENL teacher are also versant in various types of graphic organizers which are used to support ELLs. All content is delivered in a step-by-step, structured format which provides various access points to the material. Home language glossaries and dictionaries are also used to support content area instruction. Students are encouraged to use their home language to inform their understanding of new material and content, and students can also speak in a common home language to discuss classroom material. At times, home language may be used to express ideas in formal spoken and written settings, which is then graded by teachers/speakers of that home language, or translated through translation services. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is available for our ELLs on an as-needed basis. Students and/or the ENL teacher make a determination as to which content needs to be delivered in the native language. Usually this content is delivered in the written format, as translated texts or native language supplemental texts. In the case where oral input needs to be delivered, our diverse staff is fluent in eight different languages (French, Spanish, Arabic, Tagalog, German, Japanese, Korean, and English) and can be used to deliver native language content material in cooperation with the content teacher. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When and where possible, all content material is delivered at the age and grade-level of the student. For example, students are given high-school level texts in the native language, and all graphic organizers are presented at the high school level. The one exception to this may be in our use of high-low readers. These are high-interest low-level reading books that we use to differentiate for the various reading levels of our students. Students with particularly low reading levels may quickly grow frustrated with grade-level texts, so for independent reading assignments, we may assign a high-low reader so that students do not lose their interest and enjoyment of reading. On a similar vein, we allow our ninth grade ELLs to choose their books for their independent reading texts because student choice leads to higher engagement in the reading. We try to develop a love of reading and a culture of literacy for the ELLs at UAG. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? A combination of teacher-created materials and publisher-generated materials are used to support the instruction of our ELLs. All materials are made available in English and the students’ native languages when and where necessary. We use Google Translate to create these documents. When publishers provide native language texts in other languages, these materials are used in lieu of or to support the input of content material. Content teachers and the ENL teacher are also versant in various types of graphic organizers which are used to support ELLs. All content is delivered in a step-by-step, structured format which provides various access points to the material. Home language glossaries and dictionaries are also used to support content area instruction. Students are encouraged to use their home language to inform their understanding of new material and content, and students can also speak in a common home language to discuss classroom material. At times, home language may be used to express ideas in formal spoken and written settings, which is then graded by teachers/speakers of that home language, or translated through translation services. 2018-19 CEP 67  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Throughout the summer before the start of the school year, our entire staff visits the homes of all of our students, including our ELLs. If parents and students are unavailable for a home visit, we will invite them to our school to ensure that all parents and students have contact with a member of the UAG staff before the school year. This also ensures the dissemination of important material as well as a chance for the families to learn about the culture of UAG. One special orientation we offer is called “The Gateaway.” All incoming freshmen and transfer students are invited to this overnight retreat held in upstate New York. Staff and students participate in team-building and community-building activities. For new enrollees throughout the school year, we offer a modified “Gateway” in New York City so that all students have an opportunity to learn about the culture, life and work at UAG. This also gives the ELLs an opportunity to see the staff in more of a support role as relationship-building is encouraged during these events. The school counselor, Ms. Karla Joseph, the parent coordinator, Ms. Greisys Feliz, the acting principal, Kristina Dvorakovskaya, and the ENL teachers, Mina Leazer and Ambar Terrero help facilitate these activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Spanish to our ELLs. Because we have many native speakers of Spanish, we are also able to offer a Spanish class directed towards native Spanish speakers and heritage speakers. This class focuses more on Spanish language literature and topics and themes that are discussed in Spanish, while the regular Spanish language class focuses on Spanish language instruction at the beginning level. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development (PD) plan for all ELL personnel at the school happens every Tuesday from 3:10-4:10pm during what we call “Power Academy.” This is a teacher-led, administrator-facilitated PD time where staff are able to communicate their PD needs and receive support through a planned PD. At multiple points during the year, the ENL teacher runs a specific PD related to the specific needs of our ELLs. The first of these trainings involves introducing all personnel to the ELLs at UAG, and various strategies that can be used to support them. Subsequent trainings include specific data from our ELLs’ performance on assessments and in classes. The staff then comes together to come up with a specific action plan for each student. Calendar dates of 2017-18 PDs are as follows: 9/5, 9/6, 9/12, 9/19, 9/26, 10/3, 10/10, 10/17, 10/24, 10/31, 11/7, 11/14, 11/21, 11/28, 12/5, 12/12, 12/19, 1/2, 1/9, 1/16, 1/29, 2/6, 2/13, 2/27, 3/6, 3/13, 3/20, 3/27, 4/10, 4/17, 4/24, 5/1, 5/8, 5/15, 5/22, 5/29, 6/5, 6/7, 6/26, 6/28 2018-19 CEP 68  Relevant parties at these PDs include the school secretary, Michelle Jordan, assistant principal, Corinth Hunter, and guidance counselors from all four grade levels. The ENL teacher is encouraged to attend any trainings offered through the Office of ELLs, the network Urban Assembly office, or the UFT to support the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards. Many of these trainings are about long-term ELL literacy supports, guiding independent activities, Collaborative Strategic Reading, Question Formulation Technique. These offer different ways to enable content teachers to elicit responses from ELLs so as to generate langauge through multiple means. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to support the staff to assist ELLs transitioning from middle to high school, grade team meetings are held throughout the year to report on the progress of our 9th grade class with particular attention to our ELLs. Ninth grade teachers and advisors are given information about ELLs and their families as well as their past performance and/or accommodations in middle school. We will even focus on specific struggling students and come up with an action plan that all ninth grade teachers will implement in order to facilitate a struggling ELL’s transition into high school. There is also an advisory program in which all ELLs participate. This is a smaller group of about fifteen students that meets every other day with the specific goal of meeting their affective needs as well as to provide a forum where they can ask questions, receive extra help, and hone skills that they will need in all of their high school classes. All UAG teachers have access to the 15% of hours of ELL training, or the 50% of hours of ELL training for ENL teachers, by combining in-house and external PDs. Within UAG, we provide up to 4 hours of in-house training which deals with the specific needs of our ELLs. The ENL teacher attends two to three trainings a year and can either turnkey these trainings or invite content teachers to participate in them as well. All teachers keep records of their ELL-specific training hours for tracking purposes. These hours can be met through Urban Assembly network PDs, UFT workshops and other relevant trainings. Specific activities for these PDs often include instruction in how to scaffold complex reading and writing projects, cultural sensitivity training, eliciting questions, using collaborative reading, teacher-specific questions and PDs, to name a few. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher will reach out to parents of ELLs during Parent-Teacher conferences to discuss the nature of the ENL program at our school. When parents are unable to make these hours, specific meetings are also scheduled at the parents' convenience, usually with the school guidance counselor and student present. We have at least a dozen staff members who speak eight different languages. In coordination with the ENL teacher, we keep in touch with parents about programming choices, assistance with school support and programming, community outreach and parent-teacher conferences. In addition to monthly parent association meetings, we also communicate specific ELL-specific meetings to our parents. They are invited annually to the city-wide parents of ELLs outreach meeting. This past year, our bilingual social worker attended the 2018-19 CEP 69  Citywide Parent Conference to gather important information about how parents can support their children’s academic success. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All records are kept in annualized binders by the ENL teacher. Outreach is coordinated through the ENL teacher and the parent coordinator as well as all relevant parties who translate for the parent-teacher interaction. Unfortunately, many parents of ELLs work, and are not able to be as involved as they would like to be. The staff makes all opportunities available for these parents to meet outside of the mandated times (parent-teacher conferences, parent association meetings, curriculum nights) for privately scheduled meetings so they can check on the progress of their children. The Parent Coordinator, who also speaks Spanish, makes frequent contact with the parents of ELLs to ensure that they are given every opportunity to participate. We also ensure that real-time translation is available for ALL of our parent events. We also offer an annual dinner for parents of ELLs during November so we can meet the parents of all of our ELLs. From there parents are offered various opportunities to chaperone, visit and get involved with their child's progress. In addition to academic intervention meetings, parents are invited to academic celebrations such as the National Honor Society inductions, graduation, and awards ceremonies. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kristina Dvorakovskaya, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: UAGateway School School DBN: 02M507 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Kristina Dvorakovskaya Principal Corinth Hunter Assistant Principal Greisys Feliz Mina Leazer Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diana Sanchez Parent Lauren Davenport/English Teacher/Subject Area Marvin Gruszka/Science Teacher/Subject Area Alex Rigney Fred Walsh Yuet Chu Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director Other Other Other 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M507 School Name: UAG Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mina Leazer Teacher Yes YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Urban Assembly Gateway School for Technology uses the Home Language Aggregation Report (RHLA) in ATS to gather demographic language about the students' home language. We also include the Parents Preferred Language Form in the orientation packet to ensure parents receive corespondance from the school in their preferred language. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher then work together to ensure all documents are provided in the necessary language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 73  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Chinese, French, Fulani, Hausa, Italian, Mandarin, Punjabi, Vietnamese, Wolof 288 60% 192 40 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Orientation Packet, HLIS, School Calendar August Photo consent form - School compact - Attendance Policy - PA meeting notice - Once a month P/T Conferences - 9/23, 11/12, 3/3, 5/3 After-school program information - Ongoing throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator and LAC work in June to ensure documents are translated. They use google translate as well as reaching out to other staff members who speak another language. Parent Coordinator and LAC work in June to ensure documents are translated. They use google translate as well as reaching out to other staff members who speak another language Parent Coordinator and LAC work in June to ensure documents are translated. They use google translate as well as reaching out to other staff members who speak another language Parent Coordinator and LAC work in June to ensure documents are translated. They use google translate as well as reaching out to other staff 2018-19 CEP 74  DRP Letters - Three times a year, Sept, Dec, May Weekly updates from Principal Weekly members who speak another language Parent Coordinator and LAC work in June to ensure documents are translated. They use google translate as well as reaching out to other staff members who speak another language Jupitergrades automatically translates based on language preference 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night - September Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, May Guidance Phone Calls - Ongoing throughout the year SLT * PTA Ongoing throughout the year interpretation service(s)? DOE FREE OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETATION SERVICE and staff who speak other languages. DOE FREE OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETATION SERVICE and staff who speak other languages. DOE FREE OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETATION SERVICE and staff who speak other languages. DOE FREE OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETATION SERVICE and staff who speak other languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. DOE FREE OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETATION SERVICE and staff who speak other languages. Google translate, if needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 75  The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide training to parent coordinators and other key school-based staff on language access requirements. These personnel will turnkey training to the rest of staff during PD. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will use the RHLA report in ATS or the Home Language Identification Survey for each student that is in our school to determine the home language for the parent correspondences. We will also record the responses of the Parents Preferred Language Form and record these changes in ATS. The Parent Coordinator and the ENL teacher will tabulate the responses and record the languages with each student, and then according to the translation and interpretation needs, we will follow the above procedures for all written and spoken translations. In addition, we will inform parents of their rights and responsibilities by sending home the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. We will post the translated sign that states the availability of translation and interpretation services, and we will direct parents to the Office of English Language Learners website for additional resources. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parents receive surveys home in the Spring about the quality of their interaction with the school. Additionally, parents may call the school throughout the year to give us feedback regarding our services. 2018-19 CEP 76 
