2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M509 School Name: MARTA VALLE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: STEVEN ARAGONA 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Marta Valle High School 01M509 310100011509 9-12 School Number (DBN): 145 Stanton Street New York, NY 10002 212-473-8152 212-475-7588 Phone Number: Kenya Damon Fax: Kjackson39@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Steven Aragona Tracy Karas Tonya Castro-Negron Steven Aragona SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tonya Castro-Negron Mai Elsir MaeenAlsayidi ShivKadar District Information Geographical District: 1 Superintendent’s Office Address: MarisolRosales Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave., Room 711, New York, NY 10001 mrosales7@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3800 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Steven Aragona Tracy Karas Tonya Castro-Negron Tonya Castro-Negron Mai Elsir MaeenAlsayidi ShivKadar Janelle Chavis Trevor Romanzi Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Mai Elsir MaeenAlsayidi Valeria Martinez TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD Position and Constituent Group Represented Student Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 9  major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Vision At Marta Valle High School it is our core belief that all students possess the intrinsic capabilities to achieve at high levels. As educators, it is our primary responsibility to help students realize these capabilities, build upon them, and ensure that all of our students are equipped with the knowledge and skills to achieve college and careers with confidence and an awareness of how they intend to contribute to our larger society. Mission To achieve our vision, the Marta Valle High School community of educators emphasize professional learning, collaboration, and providing all students with rigorous instruction within the realm of a supportive and trusting environment. We foster positive relationships and encourage academically and socially responsible behaviors with all community stakeholders, and tailor our curriculum and instruction toward subjects that are academically rigorous and culturally responsive to our students' needs and preferences. We also offer enrichment opportunities that engage students and further support the educational process. Through this framework of social emotional support and academic achievement, guided by professional learning and collaboration, we believe that all students at MVHS are provided with an educational experience that brings out their unique capabilities and will lead to success in their lives beyond high school. We also believe that shared decision making with families and an emphasis on understanding the lived experience of students will equip us even further to collaborate with families and support the development of every child. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Marta Valle High School is a High school with approximately 300 students in grades 9 through 12. The school population is comprised of 52% Black, 48% Hispanic, 2%. The student body includes 11.2% English language learners and 29.2% special education students. Boys account for 45.4% of the students enrolled and girls account for 55.6%. The average attendance rate for the 2017- 2018 school year was 81%. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Marta Valle High School has an Academic, Career, and Essential Skills (ACES) program that serves students with severe cognitive disabilities and who are eligible for New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). The special student population works toward earning a Skills and Achievement Commencement Credential, preferably within 4 years. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction  Teachers used Common Core and content standards more consistently in their planning and instruction as   evidenced by collected unit and lesson plans Instruction was more rigorous and tasks were authentic in support of the school’s theory of action around increasing levels of student engagement as evidenced by work products shared in daily collaborative inquiry team meetings Students were able to read, write, and discuss at levels of proficiency that matched the expectations of grade-level standards as evidenced by teacher observation reports  Teacher professional learning has continued to emphasize student engagement through rigor, authenticity, and cultural responsiveness 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 11   A greater emphasis has been placed on the effective use of Universal Design for Learning for diverse learners, which has resulted in ambitious intellectual activity and critical thinking among all students. Supportive Environment  High standards will continue to be strengthened in every classroom so that classroom communities are structured around relationships and mutually-agreed upon expectations for the learning environment School programming has been restructured to create more opportunities for students to earn credit each semester by making sure that every transcript is aligned to an individualized student program   Marta Valle High School will continue to increase its focus on creating a “college-going culture” with differentiated and accelerated college support through new and existing partnerships.  All students will continue to receive direct support from NYU College Advising Corps.  Students will continue to participate in enrichment programs through the Beacon Program through Grand Street Settlement  Even more students will have the opportunity to enroll in College Now courses and Advanced Placement courses.  College Readiness Team – Meets weekly to ensure that all college partners are collaborative and tailoring college readiness programs to all grade-levels with scaffolded support  Restorative Justice & Equity Team – Will continue to meet weekly to ensure that the learning environment at Marta Valle HS is supportive and implementing restorative and inclusive practices across the school Collaborative Teachers  All teachers are engaged in collaborative inquiry cycles to more effectively meet the needs of all learners  Teacher teams will continue to participate in instructional rounds to help align their instruction to standards, ensure coherence across subject-areas and grade-levels, and increase student engagement  Department Teams will continue to focus on ensuring that units of instruction are standards-based, responsive to student learning needs, and differentiated for diverse groups of learners  Grade-Level Teams will continue to closely monitor progress toward graduation for their cohort using inquiry  cycles, focus groups, and individual counseling Facilitative leaders will receive training that builds their capacity to support, sustain, and strengthen the work of teacher teams Effective Leadership  The Principal will continue to lead the 80-minutes of professional learning on Monday afternoons with teachers  An Instructional Impact Committee comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal, instructional coach, and lead teachers will continue to collaborate and plan professional learning opportunities for all staff  Our school will continue collaborating with the Superintendent’s Team and the Manhattan Field Support Center to receive direct support and training for our staff members in critical areas of our school such as facilitative leadership, guidance, attendance, and special education Strong Family-Community Ties  We will continue to strengthen our existing partnerships to help meet the social and emotional needs of our students and families.  The school's Parent Coordinator will lead a Family & Community Engagement Team to recruit family and community members who can play a greater role in school decision-making  The school has renewed its partnership with the Grand Street Settlement and has created a new partnership with the Lower East Side Girls Club. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 12  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M509 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 148 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 24 25 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 15 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 87.8% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 59.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 71% 53% 66.1% 3.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 74 68 79.8% 5.4% 25.7% 31.8% 4.7% 1.4% 0 8% 5.5 N/A N/A 67% 57% 56.7% 12% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 14  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X [ ] X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's last Quality Review suggested the need for more rigorous and coherent curricula, including the need for assessments to be more effectively aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). There was also an identified need to modify instruction more appropriately for targeted subgroups, in order to maximize student learning for all. The reviewer also indicated that, while teachers do meet regularly in grade level teams, clearer expectations for learning outcomes were needed, as well as specific strategies for measuring impact. Teachers have not implemented comprehensive systems for the use of formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum and instructional planning and according to the review, this must also be a focus. During the 2016-2017 school year, observational data demonstrated that the level of instruction, tasks, and assessments implemented in classrooms were more aligned to CCLS and content standards. As a result, the school developed a theory of action that focused on rigor, authenticity, and cultural responsiveness as levers for increasing student engagement in the cognitive, affective, and behavioral domains. Throughout the school year, student engagement was 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 16  raised as evidenced by student work products that more accurately represented student capabilities, knowledge, and understanding. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of MVHS teachers will demonstrate at least one shift in practice that is aligned to the school’s instructional focus around increased rigor, authenticity, and cultural responsiveness. At least 50% of teachers will ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula, aligned to Common Core and content standards and accessible for a variety of learners. These goals will be evidenced in classroom observations as students will experience rigorous learning tasks that are aligned to grade-level CCLS and content standards, authentic, and culturally responsive to students’ lived experiences. This will also be evidenced in student work products that reflect mastery and/or movement toward mastery of grade-level standards. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Sept. - June Teacher Leaders, ISA  Use Monday professional development to strengthen instructional focus throughout school community so that teachers demonstrate evidence of continued professional learning particularly around student sub-groups. This will be evidenced through student achievement data obtained through cycles of collaborative inquiry.  Increase the frequency of observations and direct feedback from school leaders around implementation of school-wide instructional focus. This will be evidenced by a minimum of 2 observations per month per teacher. Instructional Coaches, School Leaders All Teachers Sept. - June School Leaders  Ensure teachers receive support through coaching sessions and are held accountable for student learning outcomes in post-observation and assessment conferences. This will be evidenced by weekly coaching logs for each teacher. All students October – January, March - June Teachers, School Leaders  Utilize the expertise of instructional coaches for each All Teachers Sept.– June Teachers, School subject-area in order to build instructional practices aligned to CCLS and NYS content standards and school-wide instructional focus. This will be evidenced by an increase in teacher ratings in targeted Danielson components. Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate opportunities for teachers, guidance counselors, students, and families to share and discuss curriculum, tasks, and assessments in each of the courses offered at the school, during the two family nights and two parent-teacher conferences. This will be accomplished through a structured agenda that allows for educators and families to discuss curriculum, instruction, and assessment at each of these events. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 18  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I for ISA and NYU Coaches to visit once per week for 20 weeks, Tax Levy and Title I for Teacher salaries. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, school leaders and teacher teams will evaluate the progress of our plans using the collected observational data and student work products. We will also use common assessments aligned to CCLS and content standards to measure student progress against baseline assessments administered in the Fall. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOSL benchmark assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. [X [ ] X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school must build on the progress demonstrated around creating a respectful and inclusive environment. Guidance Counselors, School Climate Coordinators, and the school Social Worker (Student Support Staff) have successfully implemented restorative approaches to help build a respectful environment of high expectations for all. Continued support directed toward the social and emotional needs of students and families is still needed. Teachers who can implement inclusive classroom practices that engage all learners and approaches to discipline that demonstrate a commitment to high expectations are also needed. In an effort to focus on meeting the needs of subgroups, particularly students with special needs, more instructional strategies that emphasize equity and access must be integrated into classrooms. There is also a need for classroom communities to develop stronger cultures for learning so that student engagement is supported by the expectations and norms established by teachers and students together. The Student Support Team will assess their progress using OSYD data and feedback from the NYCDOE learning environment survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 20  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will strengthen restorative approaches which will engage students and families and support students’ social and emotional development and respect for all. This engagement will be evidenced through increased student participation in restorative circles that focus not only on conflict but also on classrooms, communities, and content. School leaders will monitor the implementation and impact of these strategies through classroom observations, reflective conversations, and self-reporting on NYCDOE learning environment and NYCDOE Student Perception survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue to train all staff in implementing restorative All students approaches. Build the capacity of the Restorative Justice and Equity Team to lead professional learning with teachers through Monday professional learning. Progress will be measured by the quality of restorative circle facilitation and a decrease in the number of high- level incidents.   Support teachers’ implementation of inclusive classroom practices and restorative approaches through professional learning opportunities that center on equity, access, and cultural responsiveness. This will be accomplished through Monday professional learning sessions and evidenced by teacher observation reports that demonstrate an increase in components 1a, 1e, and 3c. All students September through June Increase the focus on creating a “college-going culture” with differentiated and accelerated college support through new and existing partnerships (Grand Street Settlement, NYU College Advising Corps.) This will be evidenced by an increase in students enrolling in college this year. All students September through June September – June School Leaders, Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance Counselors, Restorative Justice Coordinators School leaders, Guidance Counselors, Restorative Justice Coordinators, School leaders, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Grand Street Settlement, College for Every Student, NYU College Advising Corps. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Restorative Justice & Equity Team will facilitate opportunities for teachers, guidance counselors, students, and families to share and learn about restorative and inclusive practices taking place at the school during the two family nights and two parent-teacher conferences. The Student Support Team will conduct family workshops on this initiative and school-wide goal at each of the scheduled family events mentioned above. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funding to hire Lead Student Support Coordinator, Tax Levy to hire additional Restorative Justice Coordinator Per Diem, CBO Grand Street Settlement will fund partnership with NYU College Advising Corps. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, school leadership in collaboration with the above-mentioned key personnel will evaluate fidelity of implementation based on student participation rates in restorative circles. The indicators of success will be a decrease in suspension rates, and an increase in attendance and credit accumulation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will evaluate the initiative using student participation rates in restorative circles, as well as the NYCDOE OSYD database (OORS and SOHO), ATS, and STARS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year, teachers improved their planning and preparation practices with regard to designing rigorous tasks that were authentic and standards-aligned. Within each department, these tasks focused on a common standard which the teacher teams built units of study around. These tasks, or summative assessments, and the student work that was generated from them, were then analyzed by the teacher teams as part of the collaborative inquiry cycle. The teachers also focused intensively on implementation through the use of the gradual release of responsibility model. We also found that formative assessments leading up to the summative task were aligned and structured by teachers in their individual classrooms. However, these formative assessments were not shared regularly with the teacher teams and were not collectively examined using a research-based protocol as part of the inquiry cycle. This was a missed opportunity in the use of assessment to inform curriculum and instruction and will be a focus for improving our work around teacher teams in 2018-2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 24  By June 2019, at least 85% of teachers will collaborate in teams to systematically develop unit and lesson plans that reflect the school-wide instructional focus. Teachers will then collect and analyze student formative and summative assessment data that will either demonstrate mastery or be of sufficient quality to more effectively determine learning needs and priorities, to monitor student progress, and to help sustain continuous professional growth. This will result in educators developing the knowledge and skill to meet the diverse learning needs of the students they teach and in 85% of students engaging in rigorous academic tasks that are aligned to CCLS and content grade-level standards. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Principal in collaboration with coaches will develop effective Teachers Sept.-June team structures and protocols for collaborative inquiry centered on building teacher capacity to meet the instructional needs of students. Progress will be measured by the impact on student achievement in areas targeted through collaborative inquiry team cycles. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, ISA Coaches, Teachers  Teachers will be provided with concentrated time to meet in Teachers Sept. - June Principal, ISA Coaches, Teachers Teachers Sept.-June School Leaders, Teachers teams to plan, look at student work, share best practices, and track student progress toward graduation and college that will result in instruction that is aligned to grade-level standards and improved student learning outcomes in areas targeted through collaborative inquiry cycles.  Teachers will use data to inform instructional decisions as evidenced by units and lesson plans, collaborative inquiry team minutes, student work products, and observational feedback connected to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. This will result in increased levels of achievement among targeted subgroups. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate opportunities for teachers, guidance counselors, students, and families to share and discuss trends and patterns identified in student learning by grade and/or subject area, during the two family nights and two parent-teacher conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 26  SIG funding for ISA Coaches to visit once per week for 20 weeks, TL and Title I for Teacher Salaries and instructional coach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all four collaborative inquiry teams will have completed at least one full cycle that includes looking at student data/work, identifying instructional gaps, apply research-based strategies, and evaluating the success of their intervention, as evidenced by team documentation of each stage of the process and classroom artifacts exhibiting the strategy. As of February 2018, all collaborative inquiry teams are co-facilitated by teacher-leaders and have conducted at least two full cycles of inquiry. This has resulted in a close monitoring of student progress, particularly for vulnerable subgroups, and an increase in credit accumulation and passed exams. Collaborative inquiry teams have also increasingly focused on bridging individual and collective practice to ensure that curriculum, instruction, and assessment is rigorous, engaging, and coherent across all classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data-informed instruction protocol Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders have knowledge and experience implementing structures that improve positive school culture improvement initiatives and are able to effectively manage time and ensure smooth operation of school. School leaders also set clear goals, establish a long-term vision and mission for school improvement, and make strategic decisions around student programming, school finance, safety, and instruction. School leaders need to continue to build capacity of staff members to lead colleagues in the work of improving the school in each of the other areas of the Framework for Great Schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 28  School leaders will establish high expectations by ensuring that teacher practice is focused on student outcomes and ensuring that student support services are aligned to the school’s vision and mission. This will result in an increase in the number of observable best practices for promoting college and career readiness. These include an increase in four levers of engagement (rigor, authenticity, cultural responsiveness, and access) as evidenced by an increase in student engagement and performance on state assessments in June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers and Students Sept-June School Leaders  School leaders will evaluate multiple sources of information to assess effectiveness in improving professional practice and student learning.  Principal, with support from the Manhattan Field Center and the Superintendent’s team, will provide training and support to assistant principals in developing instructional and organizational capacity. Assistant Principals Sept-June Principal, Superintendent's Team, Manhattan Field Support Center  Principal, with support from the Superintendent’s team, will Teachers Sept-June develop a strategic instructional action plan driven by a theory of action that ensures every teacher receives twice monthly observations and coaching sessions with assistant principals and instructional coaches.  Principal and coaches will strengthen capacity of teacher leaders, guidance counselors, and restorative justice coordinators to incorporate clear benchmarks and accountability towards data-driven goals that are aligned to NYC and NYS progress targets. Students and Families Sept-June Principal, Superintendent's Team, Assistant Principals, ISA Coaches School Leaders, Teacher Leaders, Guidance Counselors, Student Support Coordinators, Restorative Justice Coordinators, Attendance Team, Parent Coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 30  School leaders will engage parents through the 4 parent conferences, monthly school leadership team and parent association meetings, and in a monthly newsletter around school improvement efforts and impact underway throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy for school staff, ISA Coaches, and NYU Metro Center Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all four collaborative inquiry teams will have completed at least one full cycle that includes looking at student data/work, identifying instructional gaps, apply research-based strategies, and evaluating the success of their intervention, as evidenced by team documentation of each stage of the process and classroom artifacts exhibiting the strategy and its impact. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment  Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X [ ] [ ] [ ] SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s declining enrollment suggests that the Marta Valle community needs to better communicate its upward trend in achieving results for students to the families of prospective students who would enroll in 2018-2019. The school offers more rigorous courses and college opportunities (AP for All, Algebra for All, College Access for All) and is expanding partnerships with community-based organizations to assist in our recruitment efforts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will enhance systems and structures aimed at communicating high expectations to prospective students and families, as evidenced by a 10% increase in enrollment for the following year. For our existing students and families, we will develop a monthly calendar of events that celebrate student success, diversity, and inclusion that allow families, students, and staff to interact in a non-academic environment and collaborate around meeting the goals of the school. Success will be evidenced by a 10% attendance rate of families representing the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 32  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strengthen partnerships with CBOs to ensure recruitment, marketing, and branding of programs and activities offered at the school are cohesive in order to enhance the name and reputation of the school and increase student enrollment for 2019-2020. Students, families Sept - June  Utilize the Parent Association to generate a public calendar Families Sept - June of fundraising, celebrations, and professional learning sessions, to ensure parents and families are able to take advantage of engaging school-family-community offerings and increase in the number of opportunities to actively support the school Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leaders, School Staff, Students, Families, Parent Coordinator, CBO partners School Leaders, Parent Association, Parent Coordinator  Utilize Tuesday 75-minute Family Engagement Time to develop partnerships with families through direct and ongoing communications about academic progress, attendance, and opportunities for AIS and enrichment as well as increase opportunities for teachers to directly interface with families Students and Families Sept - June Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers  Prepare regular mailings and phone calls home to keep parents updated on their students’ progress, and on opportunities and supports available in school and our community to meet the social, emotional, and physical needs of our students. Students and Families Sept - June School Leaders, Partnership with Children Social Workers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Grand Street Settlement, Lower East Side Girls Club 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 34  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funding for staff salaries, Title I funding for family and community engagement activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, School Leadership Teams will evaluate the progress of our plans against the collected data. Students may not have made enrollment decisions yet, so the team will mostly be looking at the reach of the initiatives rather than the results. As more students commit to school choices, we will update our assessment of the initiative accordingly. We will also ask parents to participate in a survey to help provide formative feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will look at the attendance of parents at monthly school community events, the number of audience members attending our recruitment efforts, and the number of respondents to our recruitment invitations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 35  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By October 2018, we will ensure ELT and enrichment time allows students to participate in activities that improve their access to engaging and enriching clubs that are supportive, and facilitate positive relationships amongst students, staff, and the school community as a whole. This goal will be measured by an increase in student attendance for those participating in ELT. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The target population served by the ELT program is all students and will be differentiated by need and preference. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Principal will conduct a needs assessment of ELT program to ensure alignment between program, student needs, and clear student achievement outcomes. We will then integrate our academic courses and ELT through the use of CCLS-aligned curricula in the core academic subject areas and physical education. Students in need of academic courses for graduation will be programmed for these courses and their families notified. Students who are in need of tutoring will also be encouraged to participate and their families informed. Students who want to participate in tutoring or serve 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 36  as tutors will have the opportunity as well. Enrichment clubs will be offered and subsidized through the school's partnership with Grand Street Settlement. Music and Dance will be offered to all students interested through this grant, as will Art Club, and Young Men’s Group, boxing, all of which will be made available to every MVHS student. Athletic clubs including basketball, volleyball, badminton, and rugby will be made available to all interested students. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The administrative team oversees and implements the ELT program as well as school-based staff. We will also work with Grand Street Settlement partners as well. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Planning in September 2018. Implementation in late October 2018 to June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Mid-point Benchmarks Greater number of students on-track for graduation in four years by February 2019 both in terms of credit accumulation and Regents requirements. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, fewer students, particularly those in cohort U, will be in need of January Regents Exams. Students in cohorts V, W, and X will have accumulated more credit and therefore be closer to achieving graduation in four years. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit accumulation and Regents data from student transcripts Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 37  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Regents Exams, formative assessments, summative assessments, exit slips, classwork, projects, homework and parental requests. Regents Exams, formative assessments, summative assessments, exit slips, classwork, projects, homework and parental requests. Regents Exams, formative assessments, summative assessments, exit slips, classwork, projects, homework and parental requests. Regents Exams, formative assessments, summative assessments, exit slips, classwork, projects, homework Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All students are given the opportunity to participate in our extended day AIS credit recovery and regents program after school weekly. All students are given the opportunity to participate in our extended day AIS credit recovery and regents tutoring program after school weekly. All students are given the opportunity to participate in our extended day AIS credit recovery and regents tutoring program after school weekly. All students are given the opportunity to participate in our extended day AIS credit recovery and regents tutoring program after school weekly. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole group, small group, or one on one instruction During the school day, after school from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM. Whole group, small group, or one on one instruction During the school day, after school from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM. Whole group, small group, or one on one instruction During the school day, after school from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM. Whole group, small group, or one on one instruction. During the school day, after school from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 38 Small group and one on one. During the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) and parental requests. Anecdotal records (Skedula), analyzing marking period grades, family outreach, OORS reports and attendance data. Student and family counseling will be available from two Guidance Counselors. Students can receive counseling on a broad range of issues including academic services, attendance and dropout prevention, study habits, substance abuse prevention, teen pregnancy, relationship abuse, depression and anxiety and many more social and emotional issues. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 39  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Student and family counseling will be available from two Guidance Counselors. Students can receive counseling on a broad range of issues including academic services, attendance and dropout prevention, study habits, substance abuse prevention, teen pregnancy, relationship abuse, depression and anxiety and many more social and emotional issues. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 40 Student and family counseling will be available from two Guidance Counselors. Students can receive counseling on a broad range of issues including academic services, attendance and dropout prevention, study habits, substance abuse prevention, teen pregnancy, relationship abuse, depression and anxiety and many more social and emotional issues. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 41  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have designed our master program to ensure that at least 90% of teacher course assignments align to their NYS license and certification area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is provided by directly by the Principal, the Superintendent's Team, the Manhattan Field Support Center, and instructional coaches. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 42  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in teams daily and focus on curriculum, instruction, and assessment. These teams collaborative design tasks that align to the school’s theory of action and specific standards of focus. These teams analyze student work products that are generated from their curriculum, instruction, and assessments and are then used to determine next steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 166,567.00 450,000.00 53,642.00 0 0 0 1,785,871.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 13, 15, 19 and 21 13, 15, 19 and 21 13, 15 13, 15, 19 and 21 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 43  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 44  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 45  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Marta Valle High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Marta Valle High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Marta Valle High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 48  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 49  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 50  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 51 ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Marta Valle High School Borough Manhattan School Number 509 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Steven Aragona Coach Diane Giorgi ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Suzanne Epstein Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Katia Pilla Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Lydia Adegbola Coach N/A School Counselor Mayra Perez Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Ricardo Rivera Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Ellen Friedland (Secretary) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 181 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 53 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.39%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 1 10 11 12 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers work in partnership with the instructional leadership team to assess the early literacy skills of Marta Valle's ELL population, and determine the best ENL methodology across content areas. Multiple assessment tools including teacher created authentic Baseline Assessment , The Measures of Student Learning Performance Assessment and the Achieve 3000 reading assessment are administered twice yearly to measure baseline performance and student growth. Additional data is derived through the yearly NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores and from teacher-made assessments such as major writing assignments and oral presentations. Data analyses are conducted by our ENL Teacher, our Assistant Principal, Data Specialist and or coaches who work collaboratively with teachers to develop research-based ENL strategies that can be used in content area classes by monolingual teachers in order to scaffold instruction for ELL students. For support in conducting data analysis and implementing ENL strategies, consultants provide staff development to ENL teachers, as well as to mainstream teachers who work with ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In-class structures are: Mid terms, readtheory.org, San Diego Vocabulary assessment, summative projects, quizzes, and oral presentations. Across school structures are: Content baseline exams, MOSL. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to monitor success of our ENL program, we review student data based on the following parameters: a) Credit accumulation during each semester. b) Report card grades during each marking period. c) Improvements on periodic assessment results. d) NYSESLAT progress in proficiency levels. e) Regents exam results and passing rates. f) Graduation rates of our ELL students. These results than allow us to modify our instructional programs and mentoring procedures to ensure that our students are constantly improving their proficiency levels and moving towards graduation and college and career readiness. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to respond to data we use: In class: a) Word walls b) Students friendly rubrics c) Universal Design for learning strategies d) Professional development for teachers in Lesson Plans with scaffolding e) Testing accommodations f) One on one or small group tutoring 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL reveals that the majority of our ELLs (#) are emerging, transitioning (formerly intermediate), and commanding (formerly advanced) (#) ELLs with few entering (formerly beginner) ELLs(#). We also have a significant number of former ELLs (#). Our total ELL population, and our entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding sub-populations are divided relatively evenly between grade 9 (#), grade 10 (#) and grade 11 (#), with very few ELLs (#) in grade 12. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Collaborative inquiry teams Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At Marta Valle High School, entering and emerging ELLs are placed in both standalone ENL classes and integrated ENL/ELA classes. Transitioning and Expanding are placed in integrated ENL/ELA classes only. ENL and integrated ENL/ELA classes are based on grade level and mixed proficiency level. The standalone ENL classes and the integrated ENL/ELA classes are taught by the ENL teacher and the ELA core teacher with assistance provided by the literacy coach and the teaching consultant. Push in and pull out services are provided by the speech therapist, and additional assistance is provided by paraprofessionals when appropriate. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? MVHS staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes in the ENL classes and the integrated ENL/ELA classes are provided according to the students' language proficiency level based on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL results. Our standalone ENL and integrated ENL/ELA program is designed to meet students' mandated ENL instruction as per CR Part 154 regulations. Our entering ELLs receive 2 units of ENL and 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA, our emerging ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL and 1 unit of ENL/ELA, our transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL/ELA and our commanding ELLs students receive .5 units of ENL/ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our core content classes use the following instructional and approaches and methods to make content comprehensible for ELLs: -English courses are co taught, with one core content teacher and the ENL teacher. Both teachers participate in ongoing professional development.-Core content teachers utilize scaffolds and graphic organizers to support ELLs-Accommodations such as bilingual dictionaries and home-language reading materials are made available to ELLs.-Students participate in an instructional program that is aligned with mandated ENL/ELA content learning standards.-Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lesson.-Teachers plan for the development of both social and academic language. In order to ensure academic rigor and excellence in our program model, Marta Valle has developed a targeted focus on alignment to content area instruction. Teachers are provided with professional development in the developing content area lessons that are aligned with NYS ENL standards and provide differentiation for individual student learning needs. Instructional programming provides teachers of ELL students with scheduled opportunities to work collaboratively to evaluate student work and assessment data, determine the language development needs of their students in weekly Grade Level Professional Learning Teams and monthly Department Professional Learning Teams. Modeling of academic language use and consistent application of spiraling language provides students with support in complex text and English language understanding. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 56  We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by supporting them with proper translation and administering Regents in their native languages. In addition, teachers utilize group work in which higher achieving students and available paraprofessionals assist those in need when they speak the same native language. Marta Valle differentiates instruction for ELL subgroups through ongoing data analysis, collaborative curriculum, lesson planning, and flexible grouping. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Class work is differentiated based on student skill level and review of data by the ENL teacher. The following is a description of how we differentiate instruction to serve our ELL subgroups: a) There are No SIFE students at MVHS at this time.a) Our instructional plan for SIFE students include providing vocabulary study where the ENL teacher identifies the root word, the prefix, the suffix, and teaches Tier II and Tier III words with close attention to student comprehension. The ENL teacher identifies cognates for Spanish words, and translates words in other native languages when possible. We also use a lot of visual aids as a teaching strategy for our SIFE students. SIFE students are assessed in their native languages and are provided with reading material at their reading level in their native languages when appropriate. SIFE students are also given opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge through oral presentations and visual aids in addition to reading and writing. Instruction for SIFE students includes an emphasis on academic behaviors such as note taking, study skills and respectful discussion skills. b) Newcomer students receive the appropriate number of minutes of instruction based on their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL level. Newcomer students are provided with age-appropriate reading material at their reading level as well as home-language reading materials. Entering ELLs receive intensive and grade appropriate language, reading and writing curriculum. Culturally relevant material are incorporated into lessons and students are encouraged to share and present information about their home country.c) The Emerging and Intermediate ELLs are provided increasingly challenging reading material in English and increasingly challenging writing assignments. They are provided instructional help by the ENL and ELA faculty. Additionally, these students receive extra help in subject class assessment preparation and NYSESLAT preparation.d) Long-term ELL students are provided with support in subject class content and as well as intensive ELA tutoring. Students are offered tutoring by subject teachers in all content areas. Instruction focuses on reading and writing skills and academic vocabulary.e) Former ELLs continue to receive integrated ENL/ELA instruction for two years. Instruction focuses on advanced reading and writing, use of academic vocabulary and higher order thinking. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special needs students receive assistance through the intervention of the ENL teachers as well as the special education staff. They receive after-school tutoring services. They have the access to computers. The special needs students also receive counseling from a guidance counselor and services from related service providers as indicated in their IEPs 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students take art, music and physical education and Video production classes in an inclusive setting for all students. Students also eat lunch with the entire student body. Our school uses careful programming and collaboration between the ENL and special education teachers to meet the diverse needs of of ELLs with disabilities. We program them in ENL classes based on their NYSESLAT proficiency level for ENL instruction, then we program them in special education classes based on their IEPs and their disability classification. Our ENL and special education teachers are mindful about this special group of students. They 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 57  constantly analyze the formative and summative assessments and provide scaffolded, differentiated instructional materials at the appropriate functional level of the students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELL students in ELA, math, and other content areas included the following: Develop scaffolds, lesson plans integrating ENL standards, tutoring during lunch and after school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data the school will implement more writing instructions into stand alone and ICT/ENL classes and creative writing for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There is no bilingual program at MVHS. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs through our programming and guidance offices. Marta Valle has developed extensive before and after school programs that are offered to all Marta Valle students. Ongoing family conferences provide opportunities for families to work in partnership with school personnel to develop academic intervention plans that provide students with targeted support and enrichment opportunities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used to support our ELLS are: Google classroom, readtheory.org, Word walls, Visual Strategic Thinking activities, student friendly rubrics. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our freestanding ENL model provided through the following:Trans-languaging strategies Texts and poems in native language/ assessed on standard aligned rubrics aligned rubrics. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support and resources provided to ELLs are age and grade-level appropriate. Our ELLs have equal opportunities with all other students to all of our resources and enjoy the benefit of our library media center, computer labs, and extra curricular activities which include music studio, fine arts, and culinary arts. our ELLs with disabilities receive speech therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and counseling services as indicated in their IEPs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ELLs have equal opportunities with all other students to all of our resources and enjoy the benefit of our library media center, computer labs, and extra curricular activities which include music studio, fine arts, and culinary arts. our ELLs with disabilities receive speech therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and counseling services as indicated in their IEPs. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 58  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school offers a summer orientation, and offers tutoring services during lunch and after school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish and Italian 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Marta Valle teachers will work in partnership with the instructional leadership team to address the need for best ESL methodology across the content areas. Study groups will meet during scheduled collaborative time weekly. Our assistant principal of ESL works collaboratively with content area teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, and special education teachers to develop research-based ESL strategies that can be used in content area classes by monolingual teachers in order to scaffold instruction for ELL students within their classes. In addition to school facilitated PD, the ENL teachers working with ELLs go to PDs on Standard Aligned pedagogy and ICT/ENL strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teacher attended: Professional PDs Manhattan FSC workshops for ELL leads. ENL and Core content co teachers attended Manhattan High Schools ICT teacher leadership series. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the year ENL teacher sends out a letter in both English and the home language inviting parents to the school to discuss their child's ENL program fort the coming year. Through the year parents are sent flyers and letters in announcing ENL student events. Mid year parents are invited to meet with teachers and administrators to discuss goals of the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 59  program and review students' performance data with them. The guidance counselor and the parent coordinator speak Spanish and offer translation to any parent who might need it. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We hold a parent meeting every month. We also have translators available to assist our parents. In addition our assistant principal plans with the parent association president in order to serve our ELL parents appropriately and timely. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. At Marta Valle High School, our highly-qualified administration and faculty is committed to providing the best possible education experience for our ELLs. We are constantly analyzing available data, reflecting on our practice and collaborating with each other in order to constantly make improvements to our program. In the year 2016-2017 the ENL teacher developed and taught creative writing course for the Intermediate and Expanding ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Steven Aragona, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Marta Valle High School School DBN: 01M509 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Steven Aragona Title Principal Lydia Adegbola Assistant Principal Ricardo Rivera Parent Coordinator Suzanne Epstein ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diane Giorgi Mayra Perez Marisol Rosales Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ellen Friedland Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M509 School Name: Marta Valle Superintendent: Bradbury The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our school's translation and interpretation needs and to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they understand, the Marta Valle High School administrative and instructional teams have implemented the following strategies: a. A student home language survey is conducted at the beginning of the school year at family conferences and family workshops. b. Advisors call the homes of each student advisee about student progress and important information and verbal and written translation is provided to reach all parents and families. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 63  c. Data from contact cards and school lunch forms is noted and translation services are provided as needed. d. Signs are posted in multiple languages and posted on the school's website, www.martavalle.org. e. School professionals teach parents various online translation tools (translate.google.com) and provide one to one training on how to access ARIS Parent Link by appointment, in the parent resource center and during parent teacher conferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language According to the home language surveys, Spanish is the home language for the majority of our ELLs (17 students). We also have ELLs for whom Bengali (1 students) and Chinese (1 students) , French (1 student), Amhric (1 student) is the home language. We are mindful of the fact that many of the families of students who are not ELLs likewise have translation needs. At present, while 190 of our students' families speak English at home, for 50 families, Spanish is the primary language. 4 families are Bengali speakers, 1 speak Chinese, and in a small number of homes (1 each) French and Amhric is the primary language spoken. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 64  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Marta Valle is in compliance for displaying any parent information in multiple languages i.e., Parent Bill of Rights which includes interpretation notice signs. In addition, whenever possible communications that go out to our student body and their families are translated into the five languages mentioned above. Translated materials automatically go out in the same mailings and at the same time, whether the communications are invitations to events, notices of general parent association meetings, notices of open school days and evenings, or individual notifications regarding students. Translation for our three most frequent languages (Spanish, Bengali and Chinese) are done by in-house staff whenever possible, and we have enlisted the assistance of the Translation Unit at Central Board for low incidence languages. The Marta Valle Learning Team has been able to fully meet the needs of parent translation services to date. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parents-Teachers' conferences- Sep.30.2015, Nov. 19, 2015, Nov,20, 2015, March 10, 2016& March 11, provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 65  2016, May 10 , 2016, Parent association meetings once a month, IEP meetings through out the school year, Parent meetings with guidance counselors, deans and administrators based on needs through out the school year regarding academics, attendance and behavioral concerns. Daily phone calls for attendance and latenesses are also translated in students' home languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Marta Valle High School is in compliance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 in ensuring that parents' native languages are idenitied, all essential documents are translated into our these languages and that interpretors are available whenever necessary. Additionally, we always note the preferred language of a parent prior to contacting the home regarding any school concerns and insure that we have an interpreter standing by to assist. Our Community Coordinator, as well as secretaries maintain a listing of all parent’s preferred languages in our records and on our emergency contact cards. When necessary, we will contact the Interpretation Unit and ask that they conference a call to a parent using the preferred parental language. We have also found that some parents ask a friend or family member to assist in interpretation. We gladly support all parents in their unique needs and have found that we have been able to fulfill those requirements. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 66  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our community coordinator Dexter Hannibal meets one on one with parents and ask questions regarding language services we provide to our families and use that information to plan effectively in the future. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 67 
