2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M519 School Name: TALENT UNLIMITED HIGH SCHOOL Principal: YEOU-JEY VASCONCELOS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Talent Unlimited High School 02M519 310200011519 9-12 School Number (DBN): 300 East 68 th Street, New York, NY 10065 212 737-1530 212-737-2863 Phone Number: Fax: Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos yvasconcelos@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jayne Skoog Sarah Lee Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos N/A Marlon Diaz Amber Rose N/A Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MarisolRosales Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, 7th Floor mrosales7@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3880 Phone Number: 212-356-7510 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos Jayne Skoog Sarah Lee Marlon Diaz Amber Rose SashaMyrie Kelli Nelson AyannaWilson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erin Zimmerman MatthewGolden Member/UFT Member/DC37 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a diverse, collaborative community that empowers every individual to explore and take responsibility for authentic, bold choices. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Talent Unlimited High School offers four years of student-centered, rigorous coursework simultaneously in the performing arts and liberal arts, preparing students for an arts conservatory or traditional college setting. Students take 2-4 performing arts and 4-7 liberal arts classes per day. All student work towards the highest level of academic designation offered in New York City, an Advanced Regents Diploma, as well as a Chancellor’s Arts Endorsement in dance, music, or theatre. Students in select programs work towards a Career and Technical Education Endorsement. Our learning community is located one block from our CUNY partner Hunter College in the Upper East Side and is comprised of diverse families from all five boroughs in an inclusive, caring environment that fosters individuality and expression. As a Career and Technical Education (CTE) portfolio school, students engage in sequential and scaffolded series of knowledge, skills, and internship experiences. Work-based learning tools are designed to train students in the discipline of the artist while equipping them with a vast array of analytical and creative skills. Talent Unlimited High School believes the goal of training students in the arts transcends the art form itself: we endeavor to prepare our students for the rigors of any professional work environment through disciplined performing arts training coupled with an uncompromising academic education. Our students work closely with various arts organizations and industry professionals, including the American Folk Art Museum, Ballet Hispanico, Circle in the Square, Classic Stage Company, Exploring the Arts, Martha Graham Dance Center, Metropolitan Opera, NYPOPS, Opus Dance Theatre and Community Service, Park Avenue Armory, Pentacle, Paul Taylor Dance center, Theater Development Fund (TDF), and Western Wind Vocal Ensemble. We are also beginning to expand offerings to ensure students are educated as whole artist with depth of understanding in their own art form coupled with breadth in related disciplines. In 2017-2018 we debuted courses opened to students in all studios: AP Music Theory and Theatrical Design. We expanded our partnership with Opus Dance to music and theater students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 18% of our student population have IEP's. All students with IEP's have a special education teacher case manager as well as a general education teacher case manager to support their individual needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2016-2017, our area most need of growth was Strong Family-Community Ties. In 2017-2018 we successfully exceeded our goal increasing from 2.80 to 3.59 in Framework Scores, and 2.41 to 3.61 in Survey Scores. This was the element in which we not only made the most growth, but reached the highest score. Another major element of growth was Support Environment. In 2017-2018 we successfully exceeded our goal increasing from 2.36 to 2.85 in Survey Scores. For 2018-2019, one key areas of focus will be Rigorous Instruction, which increased substantially in Survey Scores from 2.28 to 3.40 but decreased in Framework Scores from 3.94 to 3.48. Another key area of focus will be Trust, which has remained stagnant in the past three years between 2.8 and 3.0. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M519 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 478 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 15 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 55.0% % Attendance Rate 48.3% % Reduced Lunch 0.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 42.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.94 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 97% 96.8% 33.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 47 50 19 91.1% 6.9% 15.3% 30.8% 3.6% 8.6% 2 37% 4.1 N/A N/A 100% 97% 98.8% 41% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In Advance, 39% of ratings in Component 1E Designing Coherent Instruction were Effective or Highly Effective 39% of observations received high-leverage feedback in Component 1E Designing Coherent Instruction 38% of ratings in Component 3B Questioning an Discussion Techniques were Effective or Highly Effective 23% of observations received high-leverage feedback in Component 3B Questioning an Discussion Techniques On regular administration of Regents Examinations ELA - 99% passing, 85% mastery; SPANISH - 100% passing ALGEBRA 1 - 66% passing, 2% mastery; GEOMETRY - 67% passing, 7% mastery; ALGEBRA 2 - 64% passing LIVING ENVIRONMENT - 83% passing, 19% mastery; EARTH SCIENCE - 46% passing, 5% mastery; CHEMISTRY - 45% passing; PHYSICS - 21% passing GLOBAL HISTORY - 84% passing, 33% mastery; US HISTORY - 94% passing, 60% mastery On the School Survey, 83% of students say that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school to prepare them for the next level or grade 73% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically 2018-19 CEP 12  55% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. 73% of teachers say that students feel challenged 59% of students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work 77% of teachers say that students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers 65% of students say that the homework assignments help them learn the course material 75% of students know what their teachers want them to learn in class 77% of teachers say that students use data or text references to support their ideas 100% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for Common Core Shifts in Literacy 86-100% of teachers of all subjects say they had the resources to include opportunities for Common Core Shifts in Math Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will develop standard-aligned learning targets resulting in 10% increase in Effective or Highly Effective Ratings in Advance 1E and 5% increase in Regents exams passing and mastery. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide all liberal arts teachers with their Regents Examination Item Analysis and all performing arts teachers with their detailed Arts Commencement Examination Tracking Sheet. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Faculty Sept 2018 Administration Data Team Administration Department Leads Conduct weekly professional learning to educate all teachers on learning target development Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Conduct bi-Weekly coaching sessions to ensure teacher development, implementation, and revision of learning targets Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leader Provide students with extra help support during school day and afterschool aligned to learning targets Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share and discuss our CEP goals and updates at Parent Teacher Conference events (All Faculty and Staff), PTA General Meetings (Administration), and SLT Meetings (School Leadership Team members); via weekly and monthly emails, website posts, and physical mailings (Administration and Social Emotional Support Staff). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have changed to a single-session school schedule with default professional work schedule in order to increase the amount of face time for whole faculty and staff professional learning, as well as continue Department Team meetings established last year. We have two Peer Collaborative Teacher Leaders who have a comp time position and C6 professional responsibility to support colleagues in development of teaching practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 14  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Around the January Regents testing period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Regents, Advance Ratings, Student Perception Survey, Family Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 56% of students say that most students pay attention when they are supposed to. 70%* of teachers say that students pay attention when they are supposed to. 47% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. 55% of students say that teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work. 42% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. 88% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles and teach students how to advocate for themselves. 96% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards and teach critical thinking skills to students. 69% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. 58% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students and teachers will engage in check in and feedback sessions resulting progressive discipline log 10% increase in Conversation with Student and 5% decrease in administration referrals. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Attend Restorative Justice Circle and Conflict Resolution Trainings. Administration July-Aug 2018 Office of Youth and Student Development Students, faculty, and staff engage with social emotional wellness through restorative justice conversations and activities Registration drives on Pupilpath/Skedula Faculty Staff Students Faculty Staff Students Families Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leaders Guidance Counselor Social Worker SAPIS Worker Sept 2018-June 2019 Computer Technician Community Assistant Parent Coordinator Creation of Handbook - safety protocols / code of conduct - and inclusion into life skills classes and monthly community letters Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers Families Addition of social emotional support staff: guidance counselor. Students July-Aug 2018 Administration Families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share and discuss our CEP goals and updates at Parent Teacher Conference events (All Faculty and Staff), PTA General Meetings (Administration), and SLT Meetings (School Leadership Team members); via weekly and monthly emails, website posts, and physical mailings (Administration and Social Emotional Support Staff). 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have changed to a single-session school schedule with default professional work schedule in order to increase the amount of face time for whole faculty and staff professional learning, as well as continue Grade Team meetings established last year. We are continuing to build our guidance team, adding a Guidance Counselor and Guidance Intern to our existing College Counselor, SAPIS Counselor, and Social Worker, and School Psychologist. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Around the January Regents testing period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula Anecdotal Logs report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, Department, Grade, Guidance, and SIT Teams were formalized and met weekly. Special Education and Team Leads met biweekly. All students at-risk academically were assigned a teacher cheerleader. All students in crisis were assigned a guidance or administration point of contact. All students with disabilities were assigned both a special education teacher case manager as well as a general education teacher case manager. All faculty and staff engaged in sustained professional learning in Congruent Communications and Courageous Conversations. On School Survey, 68% of students say that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday life experiences. 93% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn. 11% of teachers say that they had the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in intervisitation protocols and visits with other schools resulting in at least one liberal arts discipline and one performing arts studio participating in equity rounds. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? As much as possible, each grade in each discipline is programmed to be taught by one teacher Students July-Aug 2018 Programmer Administration Faculty Families Faculty Faculty Faculty Faculty Grade team meetings and department common planning as part of professional learning grouping. Clear communication of case managers and IEP annual review processes with entire faculty and staff Conduct "Mortality and morbidity" conference to workshop behavioral situations that escalated and discuss de-escalation strategies. Teachers share and implement one grade-wide strategy that improves student achievement, and present a challenging situation for resolution using congruent communication strategies once per year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2017-April 2018 Administration Team Leads Sept 2017-April 2018 Special Education Faculty and staff Sept 2018-April 2019 Sept 2017 - April 2018 Teacher Leaders Faculty and staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share and discuss our CEP goals and updates at Parent Teacher Conference events (All Faculty and Staff), PTA General Meetings (Administration), and SLT Meetings (School Leadership Team members); via weekly and monthly emails, website posts, and physical mailings (Administration and Social Emotional Support Staff). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have changed to a single-session school schedule with default professional work schedule in order to increase the amount of face time for whole faculty and staff professional learning, as well as continue Department and Grade Team meetings established last year. 2018-19 CEP 20  We have two Peer Collaborative Teacher Leaders who have a comp time position and C6 professional responsibility to support colleagues in development of teaching practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Around the January Regents testing period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Log of IEP attendance and student participation in social emotional activities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All members of the administration will be starting the year at TU for the first-time as administrators. The Principal was brought in in late October 2016, one assistant principal was a science teacher for six years at TU, and the other assistant principal was a special education teacher at another performing arts school. They bring with them outsider and insider perspectives and fresh vision for improving the school. On the School Survey, Inclusive leadership and instructional leadership scored the same as borough average. Teacher influence and program coherence scored lower. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will monitor and supervise Assistant Principals to grow as an instructional leader team that strengthens teacher pedagogical and leadership skills, ensuring that 100% of teacher have access to high-quality professional learning opportunities in rigorous instruction, congruent communication, restorative justice, and courageous conversations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All administrators will teach at least one class Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Programmer Attendance at summer week-long restorative justice training in circles and conflict resolution Faculty and Staff July-Aug 2018 Summer reading Teacher and Child Creation of Beyond Diversity pilot group 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Faculty and Staff July-Aug 2018 Teacher Leaders Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Office of Youth and Student Development Administration Administration Mentors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share and discuss our CEP goals and updates at Parent Teacher Conference events (All Faculty and Staff), PTA General Meetings (Administration), and SLT Meetings (School Leadership Team members); via weekly and monthly emails, website posts, and physical mailings (Administration and Social Emotional Support Staff). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have changed to a single-session school schedule with default professional work schedule in order to increase the amount of face time for whole faculty and staff professional learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Around the January Regents testing period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey and mid-year check in meetings, dean referral. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over 1500 families auditioned in 2016. Beginning December 2016, families received two mailings per month - on the first of the month they received a letter from the principal, monthly calendar update, and other information. On the fifteenth of the month they received a letter from the guidance counselor, letter from the college counselor, letter from the PTA, and other information. Families received one email message from the Principal prior to the start of each week recapping the previous week and inviting participation in activities in the coming week. On the School Survey, parent involvement scored higher than borough average. Outreach to parents scored lower. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of parents and family members participating in school related activities will increase by 10% in the coming year. These activities will include, but not necessarily be limited to 1. Attendance at PTA meetings and participation in progressive discipline and congruent communication discussions will increase by 10%. 2. Parent/Student volunteer participation in admissions events for prospective students, including Open Houses, Tours, Auditions, School Day Dress Rehearsals, and High School Fairs will increase by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Online registration of admissions events. Personal outreach to middle schools Registration at high school fairs Bimonthly outreach to families regarding PTA events Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Prospective Families Aug-Dec 2018 Prospective Families Aug-Dec 2018 Prospective Families Aug-Dec 2018 Current Families Aug 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal Parent Coordinator Principal Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Principal PTA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Union Settlement is our college and career readiness CBO partner. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have changed to a single-session school schedule with default professional work schedule in order to formalize weekly Family Engagement time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Around the January Regents testing period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Registration numbers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) failure in previous course in discipline; teacher referral failure in previous course in discipline; teacher referral failure in previous course in discipline; teacher referral failure in previous course in discipline; teacher referral below 75; teacher referral Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) literacy skills small group foundational algebraic skills small group flashcards small group scaffoldedessay writing strategies small group restorative justice small group during the school day, afterschool during the school day,afterschool during the school day,afterschool during the school day,afterschool before school, during the school day,afterschool 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Applicable Not Applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). In 2016-2017, we had two students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29 Access to agencies and school and supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. TBD 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not Applicable 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not Applicable Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not Applicable 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Column B Section Reference(s) Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 32  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 33   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) Talent Unlimited High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 36 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 37  appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Talent Unlimited High School Borough Manhattan School Number 519 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos Coach Peter Iacono ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elisa Prager Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Somin Teacher/Subject Area Jayne Skoog Related-Service Provider Natalie Skeet, SAPIS Worker Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Bridget Kiernan Coach Tania Prizio School Counselor Danese Forbes Parent Leon Jackson Parent Coordinator Leonor Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 40  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 496 Total number of ELLs 2 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.40% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use teacher–created assessments to determine students reading, writing, speaking and listening skills in the various English courses, by English teachers as well as differentiate instruction to meet needs of all learners in lessons to meet all students ELL needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have periodic department and grade team meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 41  After analyzing and examining the NYSESLAT Proficiency results and the NYSESLAT Modalities of our ELL students, we discovered that most students overall exceeded on the reading , listening and speaking modalities, but need instructional support on the writing. This has been a pattern of proficiency since the administration of the NYSESLAT in 2007. As mentioned previously, we do not have a TBE, Dual Language Program or an ESL Program at this time. We are serving all students with the required ELL instructional support in collaboration with the ELL testing coordinator, special education teacher, and teachers of all content areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have periodic data analysis and instructional alignment meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We ensure that teachers are developing, implementing, and revising instructional approaches based on data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSELAT, ELA Regents, Global History and Geography Regents, Living Environment Regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our assistance principals and data specialist coach teachers on use of data in their daily instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students receives instruction in language development from our ELL Testing Coordinator/Foreign Language teacher, and English teacher, which is supplemental and delivered during extended day. In addition, our content area teachers give English instruction through immersion. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At this time, Talent Unlimited High School does not have an ESL/Bilingual/Dual Language Program. Our ELL student receives the required ELL instructional services in all course offerings through our extended day tutoring offered two days a week in 45 minutes sessions. 2018-19 CEP 42  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELL students receives instruction in language development from our ELL Testing Coordinator/Foreign Language teacher, and English teacher, which is supplemental and delivered during extended day. In addition, our content area teachers give English instruction through immersion. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? This does not apply to our ELL population. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction is considered the cultural and regular instructional practice of our school in meeting all of our students' learning styles and needs. We also work with all of our students to assess their various learning styles. Our instructional strategic plan is based on ensuring all students have access to engage in learning at a rigorous level. Our instructional plan for students with interrupted formal education and newcomers follows the standards set by Manhattan International, our sister school in the Julia RIchman Education Complex, to ensure that students are supported academically and social emotionally. In addition to providing individual counseling, we assign a mentor from our staff. During classroom instruction, students are alternately assessed as appropriate. For developing, long-term, and former ELL's, we ensure that they receive appropriate accommodations to access the general education curriculum. In collaboration with Union Settlement, our Community Based Organization partner, we offer enrichment learning opportunities after school, on Saturdays, and summers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? English immersion strategies are used throughout subjects and grade levels. Grade level meetings are held weekly and teachers align their curriculum to address the needs of ELL students. Common vocabulary is one area of frequent alignment and discussion. As a staff, we feel that consistent use of terms will lead to better understanding of English and accelerate the use of words. Ell students are given additional support during after school activities. Appropriate grade level materials are used and consultation and use of materials from English teachers are also used. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricula, instructional, and scheduling flexibility is provided throughout our school. In order to assist ELL students wit language acquisition and mastery, our teachers are empowered to provide additional instruction to ELL students during regular class. We believe identifying students needs will ensure higher academic achievement. At the same time, we do not label students who are ELL's. Differentiated instruction necessitates that we provide a broad lesson that addresses a variety of learning styles and adequately plans for individual student needs. Teacher may use a variety of assessments for our ELLs. Our staff works together by communicating the needs of each teacher during meetings. At times, ELL's may require additional classroom instruction in one subject area and another teacher will accommodate them. Our guidance counselor and testing coordinator assist the teachers as well. The instructional needs of our ELL students are reviewed and discussed in weekly grade level team meetings. 2018-19 CEP 43  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Target intervention programs for ELL's in ELA, math, social studies, and science have been developed. Teachers in core subject areas are aware of our ELL students and use item identification to assess performance. In addition, during classroom discussion, ELL students are afforded additional opportunities to participate. We offer ELL students after school activities as well. The guidance counselor meets with ELL students periodically throughout the year and in consultation with the testing coordinator, ELL's are given verbal assistance as well. Teachers in core subject areas provide additional instructional materials that address a variety of learning styles and in the case of ELL's, these materials provide additional cultural contexts for individual understanding. Again, we currently do not have a large population of ELL students to have ESL Program in place; however our ELL students receive the appropriate and required hours of English Language instruction through other instructional support services, which includes a) Extended Day Tutoring, assigned on students' schedule and / or b) English Writing Workshop elective class, in addition to the required English classes to be taken. Our ELL students are assigned tutoring with all content area teachers on specified days after school, given the levels of proficiency and academic needs, and as per data that has been evaluated on SKEDULA and students' school record. The Foreign Language Teacher/ELL testing Coordinator, special education teacher and the guidance counselor meet with the principal as part of the pupil personnel team of the school to assess, examine and evaluate all of our students needs in terms of ELL, special education support as well as overall academic intervention. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At this time, we have formed grade level teams to further examine all students in terms of credit accumulation, learning styles, academic intervention, emotional and academic support. We are also offering students opportunities for credit recovery, for our at risk students and those that are considered promotion-in-doubt. We constantly utilize data regularly on SKEDULA to assess students needs so that we can provided the appropriate academic intervention in a timely fashion. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As a performing Arts school, all studios (drama, dance, vocal and instrumental music, and musical theatre) present performances throughout the year. We also hold a Cabaret event that is based upon individual talent. We provide additional outreach as well. Our ELL students as well as all of our students receive extended day tutoring, which is offered everyday after school across all content /subject areas. Our students are offered opportunities to participate in paid internships, PSAL sports, other extracurricular activities, and can take college level courses at Hunter College. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our computer lab is open before school, during lunch, and afterschool to all students. Our students receive instruction across various content areas through the use of the SMART Board, and lap-top computers. Tablets were recently purchased to support ELL and SWD access through app interfaces. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELL's have the opportunity of interacting with staff members who speak the same home language of our ELL's. We have added an elective film course that past two years that looks to raise awareness of multi-culturalism and an appreciation for other cultures. Native language support is given to ELL's by the Foreign Language Teacher at this time. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 44  ELL support is grade-level and age - level appropriate. Staff members meet in grade level meeting and consider the cultural and regular instructional practice of our school in meeting all of our students' learning styles and needs especially ELL's. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our building principals meet weekly to discuss campus-wide concerns as well as workshop individual school needs. Manhattan International is one of our sister schools and from them we are able to learn strategies for working with ELL population. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are assigned to the ELL advisor, who meets each month with the ELL student to check that the following supports have been addressed: 1) Transitional support into a new school 2) Emotional / scholastic support 3) Life skills 4) Academic Intervention and support 5) Support with special needs 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? DOE workshops pertaining to Foreign Language and NYSESLAT is attended by our ELL/Foreign language Test Coordinator, Ms. Prager. All teachers attend instructional strategy professional development throughout the year, with representatives from each department attending vertical planning professional development. During the summer and throughout the year teachers and staff engage in social emotional learning professional development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Instructional materials are attained for ELL students throughout the year. Manhattan International (our sister school in our complex) gives us support in instruction and materials to aid our students. Our school provides faculty and staff common planning time/common professional period during the school day for professional development. The following professional development topics are being implemented at our school for our staff members. 2018-19 CEP 45  1) Common planning time for Curricula Development and Differentiated Instruction - This time is used by teachers to assess and evaluate curricula so that lessons and units of instruction address the diverse learning styles of our students. Various models and best practices for differentiated instruction are shared by teachers within each department while following the workshop model of instruction. 2) Grade Level Teams - During the common professional planning time, teachers will meet once a week to examine, assess and evaluate curricula so that lessons and units of instruction address the diverse learning styles of our students. Various models and best practices for differentiated instruction are shared by teachers within each department while following the workshop model of instruction. 3) ELL training - Through out the year our ELL coordinator and social emotional staff attend mandated training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We bring in parents of ELLs for meetings modeled after SWD annual reviews to discuss student progress with teachers, staff, student, and family present. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Translators are provided at PTA meetings and Parent Conferences. All communications home are translated into the home language. Our Parent Coordinator is planning parent workshops targeting families of ELLs and immigrants. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 46 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Talent Unlimited HS School DBN: 02M519 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Yeou-Jey Vasconcelos Principal Bridget Kiernan Assistant Principal Leonor Sanchez Parent Coordinator Elisa Prager ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leon Jackson Parent Jayne Skoog Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Somin Teacher/Subject Area Peter Iacono Tania Prizio Coach Coach Danese Forbes School Counselor Marisol Rosales Yuet Chu 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member _ Other Natalie Skeet Other _ Other _ 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 _ SAPIS Worker 2018-19 CEP 48  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M519 School Name: Talent Unlimited High School Superintendent: MarisolRosales The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elisa Prager Spanish Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Talent Unlimited High School can utilize staff and free written translation services available from the Translation and Interpretation Unit to make sure that important documents are translated into the languages represented in our school community. Parent Coordinator mails Language Preference sheets to all parents. These language Preference sheets are kept in the student files in the guidance office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 49 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our dominant school foreign language is Spanish. Talent Unlimited School uses the information from the Home Language Survey to assess the written and oral interpretation needs of parents in our school community. Some parents need translation services. These services have been provided by live translators on staff and DOE phone translation services. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All communications home are translated to home languages via Skedula and DOE translation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 50  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At the beginning of the school year various forms are sent home to the parents/guardians in different languages. Some of these notices were translated by the Department of Education Translation Services Unit and some were translated by members of our support staff who were supervised by our Assistant Principal. Native language speakers in Spanish are on staff (i.e. attendance aid, AP, 2 Foreign Language teachers, and other support staff). The aforementioned staff members are present during face to face meetings with ELL parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A Parent Survey will be sent to parents to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 51 
