2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M539 School Name: NEW EXPLORATIONS INTO SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MATH HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MARK BERKOWITZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: New Explorations into Science, Technology & Math 3101000011539 K-12 School Number (DBN): 01M539 111 Columbia Street New York, NY 10002 212-677-5190 212-260-8124 Phone Number: Fax: Mark Berkowitz mberkow5@ schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Mark Berkowitz Robert Curry-Smithson KimRoberts (K-5), Maria Guladoni(6-8), Katy Stokes (9-12) Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: TBD N/A Carlos Rosario Oluwadra Oyaniran N/A Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave New York, NY 10001 vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7thAve New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mark Berkowitz Robert Curry- Smithson Katy Stokes N/A Oluwadra Oyaniran Carlos Rosario N/A Yulia Gutkovich David Hunter Ryan Willm Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosie Morgan Joseph Ng Carrie Bray Hyungmin Park Steve Hernon Suna Shin Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At NEST+M, intellectualism, inclusivity, collaboration and exploration within and beyond our school community enable our students to lead lives filled with learning, discovery and purpose. NEST+m's students feel valued and cared for. They develop the academic mindsets and metacognitive skills necessary for long-term learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  NEST+m students blossom into practitioners: scientists, mathematicians, technologists, writers, historians, musicians, painters, linguists and artists who learn from and with each other. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. NEST+m is a New York City Department of Education citywide school for Gifted & Talented students, grades K to 12. We offer an academically accelerated curriculum. We are the only public Gifted & Talented school in New York City in which students can move seamlessly from Kindergarten through 12th grade. In alignment with the NYC Department of Education's Special Education reform, NEST+m meets the needs of students with individualized needs. We provide SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Services) and a range of related services (Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Speech). We also provide an integrated co-teaching (ICT) model for students in Grade 6, 7, 8, 9, `10, 11, 12. There are many partnerships that support learning across our K-12 school community. These include the critical partnership formed and renewed each year between NEST+m's families, students, teachers and school administration. NEST+m's parent-body is extremely active. Among the partnerships whose funding has been secured via the PTA include: Teachers College Reading & Writing Project (K-8); NYU Physics Lab (K-5); Alvin Ailey's Arts in Education Program (4th Grade); Dancing Classroom (5th Grade); Jazz at Lincoln Center (5th & 6th Grade); Wldlife Conservation Society (6th, 7th, 8th Grade). NEST+m has also joined the NYC DOE's College Access For All program to support deliberate post-secondary readiness planning across Grades 6-12. NEST+m Problem of Practice NEST+m data demonstrates high levels of performance for many students with lower impact on learning for specific groups of students in our lowest third. (Source: NYC Department of Education 2018 Instructional Reports, Item Skills Analysis, NYC Department of Education Progress to Graduation Tracker, AP Score Reports 2018) [SY 1819]. NEST+m Theory of Action If we collaboratively engage in an inquiry approach toward professional learning, with a focus on developing students’ purposeful reading & writing skills within every lesson, and an explicit commitment to closing racially-predictive achievement gaps, then we will strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning. [SY 1819] NEST+m Strategy Statement So that we may strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning, and close racially-predictive achievement gaps, NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles that are explicitly committed to developing students’ K-12 College & Career Readiness by: 2018-19 CEP 10  A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. During professional learning cycles, NEST+m teachers engage in collaborative analysis of student work to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices. [SY 1819] As a Citywide Gifted & Talented school we welcome students with an academic readiness and a growth mindset. Kindergarten entrance is based upon student performance in the NYC Department of Education Gifted & Talented Entrance Exam. Admissions into Grades 6, 9 and 10 are based upon multiple criteria. We welcome and meet the needs of students with a range of abilities including ENL students and students with disabilities. NEST+m's Grades 6-12 Science and Math faculty includes six teachers with Math For America Fellowships: Three Master Teacher Fellowships; Two Early Career Fellowships; One "MfA" Fellowship. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. NEST+m's students are precocious learners. Students enter grades K-3 through the citywide G&T process. Our curriculum aligns with state standards 1 grade level ahead of students' designated grade (ie Kindergarten is taught at 1st grade level). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The two elements of the Framework for Great Schools where our school has made the most progress in the past year are Supportive Environment & Strong Family-Community Ties. Our three key areas of focus for the 2018-19 school year are Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment and Collaborative Teachers. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M539 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1734 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 44 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 31 42 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 23.0% % Attendance Rate 20.0% % Reduced Lunch 0.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 11.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 39.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 97.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 97% 92.9% 79.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 28 26 11 96.1% 2.8% 8.0% 7.7% 33.2% 7.4% 12 9% 6.2 97.0% N/A 100% 98% 100.0% 76% N/A No No YES YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. With regard to the Framework for Great Schools' focus on Student Achievement, NEST+m students are among the top performing students in NYC and NY State as measured by NYC Department of Education 2017 & 2018 Instructional Reports, Regents Item Skills Analysis, AP Score Reports SY 1718. 2. According to the School Quality Review, Regents Item Skills Analysis, AP Score reports, NEST+m data demonstrates high levels of performance for many students with lower impact on learning for students in our lowest third. According to the School Quality Review SY 16-17 focus on Pedagogy, "Teaching strategies align to schoolwide goals and provide entry points through the use of scaffolds for all learners to participate in academic tasks and discussion. Students engage in high levels of thinking and discussion leading to the development of meaningful work products across classrooms. However, as of yet, full engagement is not seen in the vast majority of classrooms." NEST+m data demonstrates high levels of performance for many students with lower impact on learning for specific groups of students in our lowest third. (Source: NYC Department of Education 2018 Instructional Reports, Item Skills Analysis, NYC Department of Education Progress to Graduation Tracker, AP Score Reports 2018) [SY 1819]. NEST+m Theory of Action If we collaboratively engage in an inquiry approach toward professional learning, with a focus on developing students’ purposeful reading & writing skills within every lesson, and an explicit commitment to closing racially-predictive achievement gaps, then we will strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning. [SY 1819] NEST+m Strategy Statement So that we may strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning, and close racially-predictive achievement gaps, NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles that are explicitly committed to developing students’ K-12 College & Career Readiness by: A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; 2018-19 CEP 13  B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. Teachers, grade teams and departments will work in vertical teams to strengthen our CCLS-aligned curricula, curricula coherence and curricula-aligned assessment practices. We will emphasize CCLS Writing Standard 1 as the through-line for writing across the curriculum. In addition: Grades K-5 teachers will engage in structured professional learning through the Teachers College Reading & Writing Project. Grades 6-8 ELA teachers will also engage in structured professional learning through the Teachers College Reading & Writing Project. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019 NEST+m will: Demonstrate progress in closing the achievement gap for students in our lowest third. In specific: NEST+m students create high level work products, aligned with DOK Levels 3 & 4, that require purposeful, usually argumentative, discipline-specific reading and writing. Grades 3-5 students in our lowest third will increase their ELA and/or Math State exam scores from their prior year's state exam scores. Grades 6-8-students in our lowest third will increase their ELA and/or Math State exam Scores from their prior year's state exam scores.  For all students in Grades 3-7, increase NEST+m's 3-year-average exam performance by 1.5% on state ELA & Math exams Increase the percentage of students earning 85 or above on all Regents exams Increase the percentage of students earning 3s and above on all AP exams    Demonstrate progress by ensuring that the vast majority of students use mastery-based rubrics and "process checklists" to support students' ability to engage in self-assessment and peer assessment during class. For example, while crafting arguments, students will use discipline specific, grade-appropriate rubrics connected to CCLS Writing Standard 1.  Engage students in the creation of presentation-quality written work, from across the disciplines, that will be celebrated at students' curriculum showcase (Fall/Spring). 2018-19 CEP 14  2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Evaluate and/or revise K-12 Lesson Plans & Curriculum Maps based upon CCLS alignment & Part 100 requirements. Daily focus on Clear Learning Objectives; Teachers utilizing Modeling, Guided Practice; Independent Practice, Checks for Understanding; Purposeful Reading & Writing; Real World Connections; Use of Mastery Based Rubrics and Process-Oriented Checklists K-12 Teachers in support of K-12 Students 9/2018- 6/2019 K-12 teachers, school leaders and external professional learning partners K-12 Teachers in support of K-12 Students 10/2018- 5/2019 K-12 teachers, school leaders So that we may strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning, and close racially-predictive achievement gaps, NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles that are explicitly committed to developing students’ K-12 College & Career Readiness by: A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. During professional learning cycles, NEST+m teachers engage in collaborative analysis of student work to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 16  1. Curriculum Letters Crafted by Teachers and shared with students & families at the start of the school year & start of each semester. 2. September Curriculum Night Presentation 3. Principal's Coffees held throughout the year for families of students in grades K-5; 6-8 and 9-12. Coffees are a time for providing curricular updates and announcements related to school climate and culture. 4. K-5 Family Fridays enable parents to learn from and with their child. 5. Parent Engagement and real-time performance information is provided by teachers for students in Grades 6-12 via the online communication system, PupilPath. K-5 teachers regularly send classroom updates directly to the families of students in their classroom. 6. NEST+m's Principal and Parent Coordinator send weekly notes to families. NEST+m's Assistant Principals send grade-specific updates to deepen family awareness of the arc of student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NEST+m School Members, i.e, Administration, Teachers, and Parents PTA Funding for partnership with Teachers College Reading & Writing Project. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring will take place during each month's SLT meeting. Indicator: In addition to bi-weekly progress monitoring and regularly-scheduled collaborative analysis of student work, Teacher Teams will assess student performance indicators in alignment with this document's previously-stated "Rigorous Instruction" Goals at mid-term Fall 2018; end of Semester 2018; Midterm Spring 2019; End of Semester 2019. The following indicators from the NYC DOE School Quality Guide will grow by at least 1.5%  75% of students say that teachers want students to become better thinkers, not just memorize things (Q5e, SY 1718))  59% of students say they are challenged in class (Q5a)  76% of teachers say they receive support around how to incorporate students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice (Q2a) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 17  Progress Monitoring will feature monthly updates provided at each SLT meeting. Evidence of progress will include qualitative and quantitative data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. NEST+m's strengths are our safe caretaking environment. Nest+m students feel valued and cared for. According to the NYC School Survey SY1718, 93% of K-12 students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at their school. In addition, 90% of students K-12 agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of their school. 2. Our priority need is to deepen students' social-emotional learning (SEL) skills and academic mindsets through the differentiated development of students' SEL skills across our K-12 community. We will also deepen students' cross-cultural competencies by creating culturally responsive learning experiences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. NEST+m teachers and faculty will proactively develop students' Cross Cultural Competencies & Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) Capacities--Self Awareness, Social Awareness, Decision Making, through differentiated SEL resources: Paths (Grades K-2), Restorative Circles (Grades 3-12), Second Step (Grades 6-8). We will demonstrate progress by increasing by 2% the number of students who agreed or strongly agreed that “their teachers use examples of students' different cultures/backgrounds/families in their lessons to make learning more meaningful for them.” We will conduct cross-grade learning experiences that unify our school across grade levels while teaching into and supporting students' self-awareness, social awareness, relationship skills, decision making and Respect for All. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of inter-grade discussion connected to our shared summer reading, The Boy Who Harnessed The Wind by William Kamkwamba. Visit by Mr. Kamkwamba for students in Grades 6-12. Shared readings of "Books of the Month" featuring a range of cross-cultural experiences for students in grades K-5. Teachers & Students September 2018 to June 2019 K-5 Teachers (Sept to June) 6-12 Teachers (Sept) Faculty training on Paths (K-2); 2nd Step (6-8); Restorative Circles(K-12); To foster Self Awareness, Social Awareness and Culturally Responsive Pedagogy, NEST+m teachers will engage in a deliberate curriculum review to ensure their use of inclusive, multicultural sources within K-12 units of study as aligned to Teaching Tolerance's Social Justice Standards. Teachers, Students & Families K-12 Teachers & Students Fall 2018 K-12 Guidance Team & Restorative Circle Team Fall 2018 to June 2019 K-12 teachers, school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Curriculum Letters Crafted by Teachers and shared with students & families at the start of the school year & start of each semester. 2. September Curriculum Night Presentation 3. Principal's Coffees are held each month for K-5; 6-8 and 9-12 families. Coffees are a time for providing curricular updates and announcements related to school climate and culture. 4. K-5 Family Fridays enable parents to learn from and with their child. 5. Parent Engagement occurs directly from teachers including our Grades 6-12 via the online communication system: PupilPath. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Guidance Team, Administrative Team, PTA Whole Child Committee, external specialists re: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Restorative Circles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will demonstrate progress by increasing by 2% the number of students who agreed or strongly agreed that “their teachers use examples of students' different cultures/backgrounds/families in their lessons to make learning more meaningful for them.” Indicator: Teacher Teams will assess students' reflective writing, as connected to Supportive Environment Goals at mid-term Fall 2018; end of Semester 2018; Midterm Spring 2019; End of Semester 2019 Benchmark: Monthly check-ins will enable progress monitoring to take place in 3-4 week cycles. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress toward reaching this goal will be provided through monthly updates provided at each SLT meeting. Evidence of progress will include qualitative and quantitative data aligned to the NYC School Survey and other metrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Schools Strengths: According to the School Quality Review, April 2017, "The majority of teacher teams are engaged in structured inquiry-based collaborations that align to the school goals." NEST+m's practices were rated Proficient according to QR Indicator 4.2, Teacher Teams & Leadership Development. 2. Priority Needs: Quality Review SY 16-17 focus on Pedagogy, "Teaching strategies align to schoolwide goals and provide entry points through the use of scaffolds for all learners to participate in academic tasks and discussion. Students engage in high levels of thinking and discussion leading to the development of meaningful work products across classrooms. However, as of yet, full engagement is not seen in the vast majority of classrooms." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. So that we may strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning, and close racially-predictive achievement gaps, NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles , 1x per week, that are explicitly committed to developing students’ K-12 College & Career Readiness by: A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. During professional learning cycles, NEST+m teachers engage in collaborative analysis of student work to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles that are explicitly committed to developing students’ K-12 College & Career Readiness by: K-12 teachers 10/18 to 6/19 School Leaders, NEST+m Professional Learning Committee & Teacher Teams A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. NEST+m teachers will engage in collaborative analysis of student work to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-12 teachers 10/18 to 6/19 School Leaders, NEST+m Professional Learning Committee & Teacher Teams How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Curriculum Letters Crafted by Teachers and shared with students & families at the start of the school year & start of each semester. 2. September Curriculum Night Presentation 3. Principal's Coffees are held each month for K-5; 6-8 and 9-12 families. Coffees are a time for providing curricular updates and announcements related to school climate and culture. 4. K-5 Family Fridays enable parents to learn from and with their child. 2018-19 CEP 23  5. Parent Engagement occurs directly from teachers including our Grades 6-12 via the online communication system: PupilPath. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time within Monday Professional Learning Time and Tuesday "Other Professional Work" Time; Partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. District Level support for Teacher Leaders with a focus on vertical skills alignment and data analysis. Instructional Rounds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring will take place during each month's SLT meeting. Indicator: In addition to bi-weekly progress monitoring and monthly collaborative analysis of student work, Teacher Teams will assess student performance indicators in alignment with Rigorous Instruction Goals at mid-term Fall 2018; end of Semester 2018; Midterm Spring 2019; End of Semester 2019. Benchmark: Monthly check-ins will enable progress monitoring to take place in 3-4 week cycles.  Monday September 17  Tuesday October 16  Tuesday November 20  Tuesday December 18  Tuesday January 15  Tuesday February 19  Tuesday March 19  Tuesday April 16  Tuesday May 21  Tuesday June 18 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 24  Progress toward reaching this goal will be provided through monthly updates provided at each SLT meeting. Evidence of progress will include qualitative and quantitative data provided by teachers. Indicator: Teacher Teams will assess the impact of their collaborative professional learning during Professional Learning share-outs following each PLC cycles. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: According to the NYC School Survey SY1718:  90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets high standards for student learning.  92% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 2. Priority Needs: Strengthening Effective School Leadership with regard to teachers experience of Instructional Leadership. According to the NYC School Survey SY1819: 60% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. NEST+m School Leaders will enhance our distributive leadership practices so that we may nurture the professional growth of teachers and faculty. As a result, the percentage of NEST+m teachers who agree or strongly agree that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers will increase by 3% and Teacher-Principal Trust will also increase. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By June 2019 Principal and Administrative Team will collaboratively engage in curricular planning and analysis of student work to support teachers' ability to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices Teacher Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselors What's more, the following NEST+m distributive leadership roles have been created and will be supported throughout SY18-19: 10/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal  Transition Coordinator, IEP Coordinator, College Access For All Teams (Middle Grades & Upper Grades), Upper Grades Grade Team Leaders, K-5 Grade Team Leaders, Upper Grades Model Teachers, SOAR working group (Staff Organized Against Racism), K-12 Professional Learning Committee, Deans of Student Culture 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Curriculum Letters Crafted by Teachers and shared with students & families at the start of the school year & start of each semester. 2. September Curriculum Night Presentation 3. Principal's Coffees are held each month for K-5; 6-8 and 9-12 families. Coffees are a time for providing curricular updates and announcements related to school climate and culture. 4. K-5 Family Fridays enable parents to learn from and with their child. 2018-19 CEP 27  5. Parent Engagement occurs directly from teachers including our Grades 6-12 the online communication system: PupilPath. It also occurs through parent-teacher conferences and individual meetings with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources. District Level support for Principal and Assistant Principals with a focus on Adaptive Leadership, Cross Cultural Competencies and the Instructional Core. Instructional Rounds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress toward reaching this goal will be provided through monthly updates provided at each SLT meeting. Evidence of progress will include quantitative data related to frequency of classroom walkthroughs and qualitative data related to how these visits support teacher practices. Teachers & Faculty will be invited to complete a feedback-survey in November, January, March. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress Monitoring will take place during each month's SLT meeting. Indicator: In addition to bi-weekly progress monitoring and monthly collaborative analysis of student work, Teacher Teams will assess student performance indicators in alignment with Rigorous Instruction Goals at mid-term Fall 2018; end of Semester 2018; Midterm Spring 2019; End of Semester 2019. Benchmark: Monthly check-ins will enable progress monitoring to take place in 3-4 week cycles.  Monday September 17  Tuesday October 16  Tuesday November 20  Tuesday December 18  Tuesday January 15  Tuesday February 19  Tuesday March 19  Tuesday April 16  Tuesday May 21 2018-19 CEP 28   Tuesday June 18 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: NEST+m has an active Parent Teacher Association that is committed to the success of our K-12 school. NEST+m is a true citywide school committed to providing intellectualism, inclusivity, collaboration and exploration within and beyond our school community. 2. Priority Needs: Developing a comprehensive plan for K-12 Gradewide bonding trips including Field Days for community building as well as learning experiences beyond the classroom or school building. Intentional outreach to K-12 families to strengthen inclusive community practices. Regularly Scheduled communication from Assistant Principals to families to provide updates on K-12 learning experiences and special events. Deepening ties within the immediate school community, NYC & NY State by engaging in direct outreach with elected officials and site visits to locations such as the NYC Center for Areospace and Applied Mathematics, WCS Zoos, partnering with Urban Advantage, taking start-of-year bonding trips to sites such as Storm King Art Center (12th Grade); Caumsett State Park (9th Grade), Central Park (10th grade), 11th Grade Walking Tour from Plymouth Church in Brooklyn Heights to Brooklyn Bridge to African Burial Ground in Manhattan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. NEST+m will demonstrate growth of family and communities ties by: Developing a plan for K-12 learning experiences that utilize NYC as a site of learning. Creating a K-12 inclusive community parent group to foster K-12 anti-bias/inclusive practices. Deepening ties within the immediate school community by engaging in direct outreach with elected officials and site visits to locations near our school building such as the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, LES Ecology Center, NYC Center for Areospace and Applied Mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 30  Intentional outreach to K-12 families to strengthen inclusive community practices. Regularly Scheduled communication from Assistant Principals to families, providing updates on K-12 learning experiences and special events. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Continue to build on incorporating our community by identifying and taking advantage of our local environment, for example, NYC Center for Areospace and Applied Mathematics, LES Ecology Center, Walking Tour over Brooklyn Bridge to African Burial Ground National Monument. K-12 Teachers and Students 10/18-5/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level Team Leaders/Department Chairs Complete monthly communication newsletters by AP’s that discuss curriculum at the appropriate grade levels and shares information with parents; Share clear articulation of AP's roles & responsibilities. Deliberate creation of elected officials meeting to deepen ties within immediate school community K-12 families and families who live within close proximity to school City, State and Federal Elected officials 9/18-9/19 Parent Coordinator & PTA 11/18-1/19 Principal, School Business Manager, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1. Curriculum Letters Crafted by Teachers and shared with students & families at the start of the school year & start of each semester. 2. September Curriculum Night Presentation: teachers' presentation of course goals and expectations for the year. 3. Principal's Coffees are held each month for K-5; 6-8 and 9-12 families. Coffees are a site for providing curricular updates and announcements related to school climate and culture. 4. K-5 Family Fridays enable parents to learn from and with their child. 5. Parent Engagement directly from teachers via the online communication system: PupilPath. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NEST+m School Members, i.e, Administration, Teachers, and Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring will take place during each month's SLT meeting. Indicator: In addition to bi-weekly progress monitoring and monthly collaborative analysis of student work, Teacher Teams will assess student performance indicators in alignment with Rigorous Instruction Goals at mid-term Fall 2018; end of Semester 2018; Midterm Spring 2019; End of Semester 2019. Benchmark: Monthly check-ins will enable progress monitoring to take place in 3-4 week cycles.  Monday September 17  Tuesday October 16  Tuesday November 20  Tuesday December 18  Tuesday January 15  Tuesday February 19  Tuesday March 19  Tuesday April 16  Tuesday May 21  Tuesday June 18 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress toward reaching this goal will be provided through monthly updates provided at each SLT meeting. Evidence of progress will include qualitative and quantitative data prepared by students, teachers, families, school leaders in relation to the implementation and efficacy of these goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grade 3-12 are identified as scoring below a level 2 (partially proficient) and a Level 3 (proficient) performance level inELA on state assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) AIS support should target areas in which the student needs growth. This data for grades 3 - 8 is pulled from State testing reports, assessments, teacher reports and Tier 1 RTIteacher data. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The firststep is Tier 1, delivered in the classroom by the General Education teacher. Students receivetargeted instruction in small groups alongside their peers. Additional criteriaused for Grades 3-12: F&P, TCRWP assessment, and ELA classwork used to identify AIS eligible students.Additional assessments used to identify skill gaps: San Diego Quick Reader, MAZE Core Reading Assessment and QRI. Strategies employed by the teacher will be driven by student need in categories such as decoding, phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary acquisition, integration of knowledge and ideas, and craft and structure. Studentare identified as being at risk of not meeting State standards as indicated by difficulty or inability to complete grade-level tasks, falling behind in the course curriculum, or Tier 2 is provided by a Special Education teacher. Students workindividually or in small groupsin a pull-out setting. Tier 3 is small group instruction provided by the General Education teacher outside of class in targeted, sustained skill-based sessions. At Tier 3,the PPTdecides whether the student should move toan evaluation for Special Education Services. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier 1 occurs during regular class time. Tier 2 occurs during pull-out sessions scheduled during non-academic classes. Tier 3AISoccurs before and after school. Initial meetings and check-ins with students, along with small group and individual instruction, occur either before school or after school. 2018-19 CEP 34 AIS support should target areas in which the student needs growth. This data for grades 3 - 12 is pulled from State testing reports, assessments, teacher reports and Tier 1 RTIteacher data. Strategies employed by the teacher will be driven by student need in categories such as geometry, measurement and data, and fractions. Tier 1 occurs during regular class time. Tier 2 occurs during pull-out sessions scheduled during non-academic classes. Tier 3AISoccurs before and after school. Initial meetings and check-ins with students, along with small group and individual instruction, occur either before school or after school. The firststep is Tier 1, delivered in the classroom by the General Education teacher. Students receivetargeted instruction in small groups alongside their peers. Tier 2 is provided by a Special Education teacher. Students workindividually or in small groupsin a pull-out setting. Tier 3 is small group instruction provided by the General Education teacher outside of class in targeted, sustained skill-based sessions. At Tier 3,the PPTdecides whether the student should move toan evaluation for Special Education Services. Mathematics needing targeted support for skill development (sequencing, decoding, content recall, etc.). Students in grade 3-12 are identified as scoring below a level 2 (partially proficient) and a Level 3 (proficient) performance level in Math on state assessments. Additional criteria used for Grades 3-12: Performance Task and Math classwork used to identify AIS eligible students. Additional criteriaused for Grades 6-12:Additional assessments used to identify skill gaps: school-based diagnostic. Student is identified as being at risk of not meeting State standards as indicated by difficulty or inability to complete grade-level tasks, falling behind in the course curriculum, or needing targeted support for skill development (addition, 2018-19 CEP 35  Science Social Studies subtraction, order of operations). Students in grade 4-12 are identified as scoring below a level 2 (partially proficient) and a Level 3 (proficient) performance level in Science on state assessments. Additional criteria used for Grades 4-12: Science classwork used to identify AIS eligible students. Student is identified as being at risk of not meeting State standards as indicated by difficulty or inability to complete grade-level tasks, falling behind in the course curriculum, or needing targeted support for skill development. Students in grade 8-12 are identified as scoring below a level 2 (partially proficient) and a Level 3 (proficient) performance level on Social Studies state assessments. Additional criteria used for Grades 8-12: Social Studies classwork used to AIS support should target areas in which the student needs growth with regard to the specific Science standards addressed in the course they are taking that year. This data for grades 4 - 12 is pulled from State testing reports, assessments, teacher reports and Tier 1 RTIteacher data. AIS support should target areas in which the student needs growth with regard to the specific Social Studies standards addressed in the course they are taking that year, as well as the overarching skills the student needs to develop for the discipline of social studies (essay writing, document analysis, etc.).This data for grades 8 - 12 The firststep is Tier 1, delivered in the classroom by the General Education teacher. Students receivetargeted instruction in small groups alongside their peers. Tier 2 is provided by a Special Education teacher. Students workindividually or in small groupsin a pull-out setting. Tier 3 is small group instruction provided by the General Education teacher outside of class in targeted, sustained skill-based sessions. At Tier 3,the PPTdecides whether the student should move toan evaluation for Special Education Services. The firststep is Tier 1, delivered in the classroom by the General Education teacher. Students receivetargeted instruction in small groups alongside their peers. Tier 2 is provided by a Special Education teacher. Students workindividually or in small groupsin a pull-out setting. Tier 1 occurs during regular class time. Tier 2 occurs during pull-out sessions scheduled during non-academic classes. Tier 3AISoccurs before and after school. Initial meetings and check-ins with students, along with small group and individual instruction, occur either before school or after school. Tier 1 occurs during regular class time. Tier 2 occurs during pull-out sessions scheduled during non-academic classes. Tier 3AISoccurs before and after school. Initial meetings and check-ins with students, 2018-19 CEP 36  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) along with small group and individual instruction, occur either before school or after school. Frequency of service is dictated by student need on a case by case basis. All at-risk related services ar provided during the school day. identify AIS eligible students. Student is identified as being at risk of not meeting State standards as indicated by difficulty or inability to complete grade-level tasks, falling behind in the course curriculum, or needing targeted support for skill development. Student is identified as being at-riskdue to one or more persistent behaviors and/or unsolved problems (attendance issues, behavioral challenges, mental health struggles, physical challenges, etc.) which negatively impacts their or others' access to the curriculum, or poses a safety risk to their own or others' physical or mental well-being. is pulled from State testing reports, assessments, teacher reports and Tier 1 RTIteacher data. Students receive skill development in the area defined by the occurrence data, which is pulled from OORS, teacher anecdotals, FBAs and related service assessments. These include Guidance Counseling, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Speech Services. Tier 3 is small group instruction provided by the General Education teacher outside of class in targeted, sustained skill-based sessions. At Tier 3,the PPTdecides whether the student should move toan evaluation for Special Education Services. If Tier 1 services are not effective, the RTI process will continue to be engaged. Based on the recommendations of the PPT, in conjunction with thegeneral educationteacher(s), parents, and student, appropriate related services (Special Education, Counseling, OT, PT, etc.) will be recommended and periodically reviewed and adjusted. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  TBD 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. TBD 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NEST+m engages in active recruitment of highly qualified teachers. We have a K-5 hiring committee and are developing hiring committees for Grades 6-12. We provide support new-to-NEST+m teacher series that provides peer to peer support; a series of meetings to support teachers who are still within their probationary years; formal mentoring for those who require mentoring for licensure; model teachers and strong grade teams to formally support our retention of highly qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). So that we may strengthen the capacity for all students to create high level demonstrations of learning, and close racially-predictive achievement gaps, NEST+m teachers participate in differentiated, inquiry-based professional learning cycles that are explicitly committed to developing students’ College & Career Readiness by: A) Developing students’ Purposeful Reading & Writing skills within every lesson; B) Creating Culturally Responsive Learning Environments where students feel valued, cared for, held to high expectations and supported to meet these expectations; C) Providing Specially Designed Instruction that is systematically organized, planned and monitored to fulfill students’ individual needs including goals and objectives articulated in IEP’s. During professional learning cycles, NEST+m teachers engage in collaborative analysis of student work to identify specific student needs, shift pedagogy to meet those needs, and strengthen curricular coherence and assessment practices Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 40  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 41  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 42  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. NEST+m, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 45  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [school name], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 46  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 47  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow NEST+m school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, for others, the NEST+m community & its property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name NEST+m Borough Manhattan School Number 539 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mark Berkowitz Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Roper Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Tessa Derfner Coach School Counselor Melissa Chen Parent NA Parent Coordinator Melissa Hernandez Field Support Center Staff Member Paula Waldron Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 4 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 5 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.29% D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1743 Total number of ELLs 2018-19 CEP 51  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K 9 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 9 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 9 0 0 0 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments we use here at NEST are DRA, F&P and teacher-centered assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In NEST+m, we use DRA to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. After the test is evaluated and scored, all 5 ELLs are assigned a numeric (or alphanumeric for very early readers) DRA level A1 through 80. Students with stronger reading abilities yield higher numbers. ESL teachers are able to give students books they can read by choosing a text with the corresponding DRA level. In the class, ESL teachers plan the lesson based on their level and differentiate instruction for each student. Here at NEST+m, we also use Fountas and Pinnell to determine our ELLs reading levels. We use this information to design our curriculum, provide differentiated instruction and set goals for our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the ELL Periodic Assessment to determine students’ areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? NEST+m’s ELLs speak their own language very well. Teachers from our World Languages department provide the oral and written tests in students’ own languages at the beginning of the school year. First, Periodic Assessments provide ESL teachers with up-to-date information about what each student knows and can do so that teachers can target instruction to the learning needs of every child. Second, Periodic Assessments predict students' performance on New York State Tests so that teachers can help every student meet or exceed State Learning Standards. Third, Periodic Assessments measure student learning within a grade and from grade-to-grade to ensure that students are on track for success in high school and beyond. The ESL Coordinator creates the portfolio, provides a set of resources designed to give regular, timely feedback on students' strengths and weaknesses and helps guide decisions around curriculum and instruction in order to increase student achievement. Students’ home language is used intentionally: For example, if 10th grade ELLs have challenges reading in English, they can also read novels in their home language. We have home-language dictionaries that students may use too. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL Coordinator looks at the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores to determine the ELL program, as well as the ELA state test to identify students in grades 3-12th who scored a 3 or higher on the ELA. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Regarding the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, the LAP committee has been analyzing the testing data to identify significant patterns. We've noticed that students entering at the Kindergarten level tend to pass out their first year. We have 4 ELLs who did so. We've noticed 2 out of the 3 current long-term ELLs tend to be those with an IEP, so it appears that the process of acquiring a second language is not the reason these students are not passing out, but rather a learning disability. We've also noticed that because we are a gifted and talented school the majority of our students' proficiency level is expanding. This year, most kindergarten children passed the NYSITELL except three students out of ten. We used the ELA state test to determine that only one 9th grader needed continued support due to not passing the NYSESLAT nor earning a 3 or higher on the ELA state test. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. NEST+m is a K-12 school serving English Proficient students at all grade levels. We do not currently have ELLs at each 2018-19 CEP 53  grade level. There are three grade levels this year with ELL students : Kindergarten, first grade and 9th grade. Services for our 5 ELL students are effectively rendered during one daily, free standing ESL course as well as Push In/Co-teaching by one of our certified ESL teachers. With respect to the mixed language backgrounds of students and their high proficiency level, the most appropriate model is English Only instruction in the Free Standing ESL class. Instruction is delivered using the whole language approach and workshop model. Students are exposed to comprehensive input, both oral and text, and workshop to produce language responses, both oral and in writing presentation of information is accessible to advanced ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our staff is organized and scheduled to teach these programs. The ESL Coordinator monitors the hours of instruction needed per NYS CR Park 154 based on the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT proficiency of the student, as well as, programs the students' schedules for instruction. Since our 5 ELLS are all in Expanding and Transitioning, they receive 45 minutes of integrated ESL service four times a day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction at NEST+m is delivered in English. In Kindergarten, Math, science, Reading and Writing, art and music are integrated in hands-on exploration. Children see the city and experience the culture. They become stronger readers and writers by using reading and writing as tools to carry out investigations. Our ELLs participate in a rigorous instructional program that is aligned with ESL and content learning standards and core curriculum. Our method of instruction is a combination of TPR and The Natural Approach. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To support our ELLs and other students in their language acquisition, we offer a variety of World Languages incljuding Spanish and Mandarin within grades 6-12. Our school staff talk to ELLs in target languages and appropriately evaluate ELLs in their own languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently no SIFE students Currently no Newcomers Currently no Developing students This is one example of differentiated instruction for our subgroups. Our 9th grader who is a long term ELL received individual instruction and small group instruction with General Education students. He received instruction that focused on his writing due to the NYSESLAT data. The ESL teacher differentiates each lesson to meet the individual needs of the learner, as well as the language standards. Although our current eligible ELL population is small, a total of 0.29% of the total student population, the student body is comprised of many ELLs formerly receiving services or for whom English is not a first language. These students are supported through AIS programs as well as during the scheduled 9th period English(AIS) support class for High School ELLs (1 students) and former ELLs. The AP Organization and Testing Coordinator ensure that eligible students 2018-19 CEP 54  receive testing accomodations for standardized exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We currently have five students who are ELL-SWD. These students are supported through differentiated instruction and scaffolding such as: sentences starters, modified text, graphic organizers, highlighted text, visual prompts, check-list, realia and so on. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL coordinator directly collaborates with ICT teams; pushes into ICT classrooms and physically works within our SPecial Education offices. She regularly conferences with teachers and parents. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Academic Intervention Services (AIS) program is designed to help (K-12) students including ELLs who are struggling to achieve the learning standards in English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. When any ELL does not meet the standards on the state assessment in English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies, she/he becomes eligible for AIS. We offer Spanish and Mandarin, Latin and French in our school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the increase number of ELLs in Kindergarten next year, NEST will hire a certified common branch teacher with dual certificate in TESOL to service the 9 projected ELLs. This will give our students the advantage of receiving additional service hours to ensure that our students reach proficiency. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Due to our small population of ELLs, NEST+m has never had a bilingual program. . 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Translated letters are sent home as invitations to school events. Our After School program is available to all NEST+m students, including ELLs. A range of workshops and activities is offered. Clubs and formal sports teams include: basketball, fencing, Ping-pong, dance, chess, green club, music, and more. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The majority of materials used in the ESL program at NEST+m are created by the ESL teacher and draw on the research Linda L. Kunz, expert of x-word grammar and sector analysis, Robert J. Marzano, vocabulary acquisition scholar, and the English as a second language textbook series produced by Heinle publishing as well as Betty Azar. All of these resources establish and build on a foundation for fluent communication, extending grammatical, lexical, and functional skills. Many of these resources contain color photographs and illustrations to facilitate the teaching of new vocabulary. We also utilize the Audio CDs and DVDs for Listening Activities as well as articles and fictional texts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs at NEST+m are fully immersed in English in their other classes. The ESL teacher conferences individually with each ELL’s content area teachers to identify any concerns the teacher may have noticed the student having. Content area teachers will also be expected to periodically conference about their lesson plans and units to ensure the presentation of information is accessible to advanced ELLs. Additionally, content area teachers are asked to contact the ESL teacher or the ELL’s counselor if their grade falls below average for the class in order to plan an appropriate intervention. While explicit native language 2018-19 CEP 55  support is unfeasible for such a diverse population of ELLs, the ESL teacher will draw on the expertise and communication skills of the wide array of foreign language speaking faculty at NEST+m if need be. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. See 18 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The majority of materials used in the ESL program at NEST+m are created by the ESL teacher and draw on the research Linda L. Kunz, expert of x-word grammar and sector analysis, Robert J. Marzano, vocabulary acquisition scholar, and the English as a second language textbook series produced by Heinle publishing as well as Betty Azar. All of these resources establish and build on a foundation for fluent communication, extending grammatical, lexical, and functional skills. Many of these resources contain color photographs and illustrations to facilitate the teaching of new vocabulary. We also utilize the Audio CDs and DVDs for Listening Activities as well as articles and fictional texts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time we do not and did not have newly enrolled ELLs, but in the event that we do, the following is planned: Due to the roughly equal proficiency of the ELLs at NEST+m, a homogenous mixing of students is most appropriate within the Freestanding ESL class. In said class, students are challenged to engage with new or difficult grammatical concepts presented first in isolation and then in the context of a topic meant to improve students’ academic vocabulary, written and conversational accuracy, and reading comprehension. For example, high school and middle school students learn about the subjunctive tense, identify how it’s used in the famous Broadway song “If I Were A Rich Man”, have an informal brainstorming session with classmates about what they would do were they rich, re-interpret “If I Were A Rich Man” with their own lyrics, and perform it for the class. At the kindergarten level, the teacher cooperates with and supplements the mainstream curriculum as much as possible. So, while all the kindergartners learn about body parts, the ESL teacher uses body parts to enforce and practice the recognition and correct use of prepositions. Grammar concepts covered in the middle school and high school ESL using this methodology include sentence structures and making better combinations of phrases, clauses, and sentences; when and how to use the passive voice; what past and present participles are and how to use them as adjectives; self-editing skills and how to use Microsoft Word to improve one’s grammar; and using inferential skills to understand the parts of speech and use of difficult vocabulary or idiomatic expressions. Kindergarteners will practice prepositions, ordinals, Dolch sight words, verb conjugations, comparisons, and story telling skills. . 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer these language electives to all students including ELLs--Spanish, Mandarin,. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program here at NEST+m. 2018-19 CEP 56  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? School staff benefits from ongoing communication with the ESL teachers regarding the language development of the students. The ESL teachers support staff in their approach with ESL students, making the transition to our school from other schools and grade levels a valuable learning experience. In addition to meetings and discussion at each grade level, the staff receives monthly professional development, the schedule is September 16, 2016, October 21, 2016, December 2, 2016, January 11, 2016, January 20, 2016, February 14, 2016, March 2, 2017, and June 1, 2017. Each PD session includes scaffolding and possible modifications for ELLs. Faculty is also encouraged to attend DOE administered professional development where applicable in the content area.. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our teachers are provided with 7.5 hours of ELL training as evidence by staff development days, faculty conferences, and grade conferences. The agendas for Staff Development Workshops for the 2016-2017 school year are as the same as above. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? See Question 2. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are an integral part of our school community. Parent outreach includes an active PTA with various events and Coffee Hours with the Principal monthly for Lower School, Middle School and Upper School, a series of family outreach meetings that will enable us to hear from groups of families who are culturally or linguistically connected to one another, and Family Fridays. We also hold an annual Curriculum Night and Open School Week and Bi Annual Parent-Teacher Conferences. During the annual curriculum night, the ESL teacher gives a detailed account of the daily activities and long term goals of the ESL program and allows time for parents to ask questions and voice concerns. Parents also have the opportunity to discuss their student’s participation in the ESL program at conferences and the ESL teacher will call parents if any problems arise with their student. These meetings also serve as a time to communicate with parents about their child’s eligibility for services and program choices. All communications home from the beginning of the year to the end, including schedules, grade, and testing information, guidelines for student behavior, and newsletters are sent to parents in their native language as well as in English. Our school employs a full time bilingual Parent Coordinator who serves and a point person for parents. Parents express their needs at the above mentioned Open School Week, Curriculum night and month Coffees with the Principal, family outreach meetings, and Family Fridays. Parents can also communicate their needs to the Parent Coordinator, who then relays these needs to the appropriate administrator. 2018-19 CEP 57  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mark Berkowitz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 60 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M539 School Name: NEST+m Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lisa NA NA NA Seale-Cruz Parent Coordinator NA NA NA NA NA NA No NA NA NA Yes NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We identify families who speak a language other than English at home with the HLIS form and through ATS. To aid in communication with parents in their native language, we utilize our many bilingual staff members as well as the DOE Language and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Amoy (Fukienese) Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Chinese Any Cantonese French Hebrew Hindi 1 Indonesian (Bahasa) Italian 1 Japanese Korean Mandarin Mossi (More) Malayalam1 Nahuatl Nepali English Punjabi (Panjabi) Polish Portuguese Russian Spanish SX (American) Sign Language Tamil Thai Tibetan Turkish 3 0 4 53 148 0 4 1 1 1 1 2 1 0 0 1 1 1 2587 2 12 1 18 88 0 1 1 6 1 0.1 0 0.14 1.8 5.04 0 0.14 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.07 0.03 0 0 0.03 0.03 0.03 88.02 0.07 0.41 0.03 0.61 2.99 0 0.03 0.03 0.2 0.03 3 2 4 54 120 8 5 1 1 1 1 4 1 22 1 1 1 1 2573 2 12 1 23 88 1 2 0 6 0 0.1 0.07 0.14 1.84 4.08 0.27 0.17 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.14 0.03 0.75 0.03 0.03 0.03 87.55 0.07 0.41 0.03 0.78 2.99 0.03 0.07 0 0.2 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 62  N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. A. Our school provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. B. Our school has posted a sign at the primary entrance to the school in each of the covered languages, for example, Spanish, Mandarin, Russian, etc. C. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. D. The Department’s website provides information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and we train parents how to access such services. NA NA NA a) September 2018 We use documents that are already-translated by the DOE. We also use language line for over the phone translation. NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 63  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conference 11/29/2018-11/30/2018 Parent-teacher conference 11/29/2018-11/30/2018 3/7/2019-3/8/2019 3/7/2019-3/8/2019 ESL progress meeting with parents 2/2/2015 3/15/2015 ESL progress meeting with parents 2/2/2015 3/15/2015 We hire in-person translation services for parent-teacher conferences. We use LanguageLine for in-person meetings in languages other than English. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use LanguageLine to communicate directly with families in languages other than English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All NEST+m teachers and faculty have start-of-year training regarding Chancellors Regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have Posters in different Languages in Main Office. To aide in communication with parents in their native language, we utilize our many bilingual staff members to translate in Teacher-parent meetings. We provide the following oral interpreattion services: Spanish, French, Mandarin, Latin and German and Russian. Our school employs full time bilingual guidance counselors who serve as immediate points of contact for Spanish speaking and Mandarin/Cantonese speaking families. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use Parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 65 
