2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M545 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR DUAL LANGUAGE AND ASIAN STUDIES Principal: LI YAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Dual Language and Asian Studies 310200011545 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M545 350 Grand Street, Fifth Floor New York, NY 10002 212 475 4097 Phone Number: School Contact Person: Li Yan Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: 212 673 1392 Fax: lyan@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Li Yan MitsuriKakuda Kevin Yienger Yu HsinLiao Xinyu Xu N/A District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue VOrlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3739 Phone Number: (212) 356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  94MFSC FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Li Yan MitsuriKakuda Vincent Orgera Wing CammyLaw Florence Yuen YuyaoShi Arlene Chan Kevin Yienger BereniceVixamar *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MeesunJohn LaiMan Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Guidance Counselor Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? High School for Dual Language and Asian Studies is dedicated to preparing its students to meet the challenges of the 21st century. We are devoted to providing quality instruction and guidance counseling to promote the academic and social development of our students as well as their linguistic capacity, cultural appreciation, and international and global awareness. Our goal is for each of our students to grow intellectually, morally, socially, culturally and personally so they are ready for the next stage of their education and are able to realize their full potential. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School for Dual Language and Asian Studies is a public school providing an enriched high school experience, which affords both English Language Learners and English Proficient students from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds the opportunity to meet high academic standards while becoming proficient in both English and Mandarin. We are a close-knit community dedicated to preparing students to meet the challenges of the 21st century by providing quality instruction with rigorous content; and guidance counseling to promote academic and social development as well as linguistic capacity, cultural appreciation, and international and global awareness. In freshmen year, the guidance department goes to classes to make students aware of the college process and how it connects to academic and career choices. Junior Achievement meets with students in small groups (JANY University) to inform them about what they should be doing each year to become a competitive candidate for college. We also take them on trips to New York University. At the beginning of each semester, teachers share the syllabus and grading policy with students and parents. The parent coordinator helps all parents have access to their student progress on Engrade (as do students). The guidance office meets individually with students to help them decide on their programs and encourages them to take courses to challenge their intellect. Teachers work with the guidance office and parent coordinator to recommend students AP classes and support struggling students become ready for the next step by helping them build their basic skills. We check student transcripts annually with the students and encourage them to retake Regents exams so they can get Honors Regents Diplomas and can be considered college ready based on the scores. We also provide many programs and mentors to help students see what is possible as motivation. Partnerships with many organizations to provide services including: 1. New York Cares – Career and College Readiness, SAT Prep and College Prep 2. Junior Achievement – career readiness, leadership training for students, business competition 3. Chinese Planning Council – tutoring, summer jobs, leadership training, Regents prep, community service opportunities, college visits, mentoring, recreational after school programs – Tae Kwan Do, Drumming, ping pong, lion dance 4. New York University – writing center, college classes, drama classes, student teachers 5. City University of New York – college now classes 6. Park Avenue Armory – teaching artists, access to exhibits and performance 7. Shakespeare Society – support for English and ESL classes, teaching artists 8. Classic Stage Company – teaching artists, support for classes, opportunities for student performance 9. Tribeca Film Institute – after school program for film making, collaborative projects with teaching artist. In sophomore year, the college and guidance office meet with smaller groups of students to continue the information sessions. In the Spring, students can participate in the college readiness class with New York Cares. Volunteers work with the students in small groups on Saturdays to help them look at college and career choices and what colleges are looking for so they can prepare themselves. In junior year, we provide SAT prep on Saturdays for 65 students with volunteers from New York Cares and Kaplan supplied materials. The students work in groups of 3 or 4. We also have college trips that are open to sophomores and 2018-19 CEP 10  juniors. A few Harvard graduates also work with our students to help them understand how to be a competitive candidate for college. The parent coordinator posts all information on the school website and follows up by calling parents (enlisting the aid of student translators when needed) to inform them about meetings, programs for the students and special trips. We also have bulletin boards with internship for summer and after school activities to meet the various interests of our students. Students have participated in college programs for the summer (NYU, Princeton, Questbridge), Tribeca Film Institute, the Intrepid Museum, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Holocaust Museum and many others. The student alumni association formed a group to mentor students in the college process. They come to class to speak to students and also keep in touch by email or Facebook with students that plan to attend their college. Professional learning teams meet to discuss pedagogical shifts demanded by the CCSS and review available supports and resources to align their unit and lesson plans. Small teacher teams meet to discuss need based area of study determined by hard and soft data including classroom performance and performance on standardized tests. Every new teacher has a mentor and support from the educational coach. The highly effective teachers have opened their classrooms as laboratories for teachers to view best practices in areas where they need instructional support. The ESL and ELA teachers are paired with the subject area teachers as support for strategies to improve language and literacy skills for all students. The impact has included a shift toward more student engagement in classes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The statistics for our school indicate that we have 13% English Language Learners (ELLs) at the current time; however, if we include former ELLs the population needing additional language services is over 80%. Most of our students are immigrants or come from families that have been in this country less than 10 years. Our students require additional services to help them be successful in school because of the language issues and the need to adapt to a new culture. All of our students take four years of Mandarin (either native language arts or Chinese as a second language) in addition to the other subjects. They are also expected to take four years of math and science (which is beyond the state requirement for graduation). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas where we made the most progress were providing a rigorous curriculum, high expectations in a trusting and supportive environment with strong family and community ties. Our focus this year is to improve collaborative teacher teams that establish data driven goals with structures in place that promote student achievement by evaluating and adjusting school level decisions 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M545 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 396 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 4 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 78.8% % Reduced Lunch 12.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 4.5% 2.8% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 100% 100.0% 88.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 1 1 98.4% 8.8% 3.0% 3.5% 86.1% 3.0% 2 8% 1.3 N/A N/A 100% 100% 97.9% 78% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 90 % of students agreed or strongly agreed that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school to prepare them for the next level or grade. In 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school received well developed for positive learning environment (1. 4) Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Priority Needs In 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school received developing for CCLS alignment (5.1) Evaluate the quality of school- level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS. In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 79% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional units, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for building/strengthening literacy experiences of students as demanded by CCLS Shifts in Literacy. Action Plans At the beginning of the year, a Professional Learning Committee made up of the Principal, the Assistant Principal, and teacher leaders from each subject area was established. The PL Committee decided on the school-wide instructional goals based on Quality Review feedback, the Framework for Greater Schools, the summative feedback from Principal Performance Review and the teacher evaluations using Danielson’s Framework. At the beginning of the year, we conducted a professional learning needs assessment using structures and protocols from the Handbook for Professional Learning. Teachers worked in teams to reflect, discuss and identify ‘authentic problem areas’, needs that would be most meaningful in determining the needs of the school, needs based on formal 2018-19 CEP 13  and informal data of student achievement and teacher evaluations. Feedback was encouraged and provided in all areas of Framework for Greater School: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties. This teacher inquiry-based feedback was combined with the school wide instructional goals for the year to give a view of our school from multiple perspectives. The Professional Learning Committee used all data in planning a PD/PL Calendar for the year with structures were also established to monitor, meet and make adjustments when needed. The PD/PL Calendar includes cycles of teacher team inquiry and professional support needed: Rigorous Instruction this year will focus on instructional strategies using disciplinary literacy to support ELLs, former ELLs and improve literacy across all content areas and using twenty first century literacy skills to motivate and engage students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To continue to develop and implement curriculum and instruction designed to engage students, foster critical thinking skills, and are aligned with the NYS Learning Standards, by June 2019, 100% of our teachers will conducting 7 lesson study cycles (collaborative planning, teaching, debriefing, and reflection) in content-based and interdisciplinary teams with a focus on collecting and utilizing evidence of student engagement to further refine coherent instruction (FfT 1e) and improve student engagement in learning (FfT 3c). 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue professional learning activities to support teachers with research-based instructional strategies for enhancing student learning and literacy experiences. ELLs and former ELLs September 2018 until June 2019 Administration and PL Committee will develop effective team meeting structure based on the Japanese Lesson Study model. Teacher teams will engage in collaborative lesson planning, implementation, and reflection process using an adapted Japanese Lesson Study model. Instructional Core and FfT will be part of every session dedicated to school-wide instructional meetings ELLs and former ELLs Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teachers September 2018 until June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teacher teams will conduct intervisitations with a focus on collecting evidence of student learning and use the data to improve instruction in supporting the target groups. ELLs and former ELLs September 2018 until June 2019 Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To support higher achievement of ELLs and former ELLs through a strong home-school connection, the parent engagement activities are designed to inform parents of ELL and former ELL students about academic policies, NYS 2018-19 CEP 15  Learning Standards, and state assessments. A series of 7 worships for parents will be held on 3 Saturdays for 120 minutes (9:00am-11:00pm) and 5 Wednesdays for 60 minutes (6:00pm-7:00pm) until mid-June. Wednesday parent workshops; 1) Language Allocation Policy (Principal and Assistant Principal) 2) NYS Learning Standards & NLA Progression (Assistant Principal) 3) SAT and PSAT for ELLs (College Advisor) 4) NYSESLAT (Principal and Assistant Principal) 5) State Assessments (Guidance Counselors) Saturday parent workshops: 1) Making Sense of HS transcripts (Guidance Counselors & College Advisor) 2) HS Academic Policy & ELL Policy and Reference Guide (Principal and Assistant Principal) 3) NYSESLAT (Principal and Assistant Principal) Parent coordinator will notify these activities via email and phone, and also through the school website Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD Committee of 6 members will meet after school to design and present research-based instructional strategies during the weekly PD sessions on Fridays. Curriculum Writing Committee of 5 members of will meet after school and on selected Saturdays to further refine and align subject curricular with the NYS Learning Standards (Literacy). Data team of 2 members will meet after school to analyze the results of the NYC and NYS assessments and monitor student group progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 16  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Evidence of student engagement with learning and literacy experiences as evidenced by curriculum, lesson plans, and individual teacher and school-level MOTP ratings Informal student survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYC Performance Assessment January Regents Teacher-created formative and summative assessment tools Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 98% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at their school. In 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school received well developed for positive learning environment (1. 4) Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults Priority Need In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 54% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. Action Plan At the beginning of the year, a Professional Learning Committee was established, made up of the Principal, the Assistant Principal, teacher leaders from each subject area and the instructional coach from Generation Ready, in deciding the school-wide instructional goals. These goals were based on Quality Review feedback, the Framework for Greater Schools, the summative feedback from Principal Performance Review and the teacher evaluations using Danielson’s Framework. At the beginning of the year, we conducted a professional learning needs assessment using structures and protocols from the Handbook for Professional Learning. Teachers worked in teams to reflect, discuss and identify ‘authentic problem areas’, needs that would be most meaningful in determining the needs of the school, needs based on formal and informal data of student achievement and teacher evaluations. Feedback was encouraged and provided in all areas of Framework for Greater School: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties. This teacher inquiry-based feedback was combined with the school wide instructional goals for the year to give a view of our school from multiple perspectives. The Professional Learning Committee used all data in planning a PD/PL 2018-19 CEP 18  Calendar for the year with structures were also established to monitor, meet and make adjustments when needed. The PD/PL Calendar includes cycles of teacher team inquiry and professional support needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, staff at HSDLAS will engage in multiple professional development sessions on topics including growth mindset and mindfulness. Teachers will reflect growth mindset and mindfulness in providing feedback to students and in communicating student progress with families. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Sessions All teachers Use of surveys, observations, and interactions on EnGrade All teachers September 2018 until June 2019 September 2018 until June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and on-going support about how to support students at home will be provided by the guidance counselors in collaboration with a Behavioral Health Coach from START Treatment and Recovery Centers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD Committee of 6 members will meet after school to design and present research-based instructional strategies during the weekly PD sessions on Fridays. Curriculum Writing Committee of 5 members of will meet after school and on selected Saturdays to further refine and align subject curricular with the NYS Learning Standards (Literacy). Guidance department of 3 members and a Behavioral Health Coach will conduct workshops for parents and maintain on-going communications with parents. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Use of surveys, observations, and interactions on EnGrade Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observations based on FfT 3d Student-teacher and parent-teacher interactions on EnGrade Informal survey of students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 96% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers respect their culture/background (Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction). In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 100%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. Priority Needs In 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school received developing for Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2) for positive learning environment (1. 4) Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning Action Plan At the beginning of the year, a Professional Learning Committee was established, made up of the Principal, the Assistant Principal, teacher leaders from each subject area and the instructional coach from Generation Ready, in deciding the school-wide instructional goals. These goals were based on Quality Review feedback, the Framework for Greater Schools, the summative feedback from Principal Performance Review and the teacher evaluations using Danielson’s Framework. At the beginning of the year, we conducted a professional learning needs assessment using structures and protocols from the Handbook for Professional Learning. Teachers worked in teams to reflect, discuss and identify ‘authentic problem areas’, needs that would be most meaningful in determining the needs of the school, needs based on formal and informal data of student achievement and teacher evaluations. Feedback was encouraged and provided in all areas of Framework for Greater School: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties. This teacher inquiry-based feedback was combined with the school wide instructional goals for the year to give a view of our school from multiple perspectives. The Professional Learning Committee used all data in planning a PD/PL Calendar for the year with structures were also established to monitor, meet and make adjustments when needed. The PD/PL Calendar includes cycles of teacher team inquiry and professional support needed. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To continue to develop and implement curriculum and instruction designed to engage students, foster critical thinking skills, and are aligned with the NYS Learning Standards, by June 2019, 100% of our teachers will conducting 7 lesson study cycles (collaborative planning, teaching, debriefing, and reflection) in content-based and interdisciplinary teams with a focus on collecting and utilizing evidence of student engagement to further refine coherent instruction (FfT 1e) and improve student engagement in learning (FfT 3c). 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue professional learning activities to support teachers with research-based instructional strategies for enhancing student learning and literacy experiences. All Staff September 2018 until June 2019 Administration and PL Committee will develop effective team meeting structure based on the Japanese Lesson Study model. Teacher teams will engage in collaborative lesson planning, implementation, and reflection process using an adapted Japanese Lesson Study model. Instructional Core and FfT will be part of every session dedicated to school-wide instructional meetings All Staff Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teachers September 2018 until June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teacher teams will conduct intervisitations with a focus on collecting evidence of student learning and use the data to improve instruction in supporting the target groups. All Staff September 2018 until June 2019 Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 24  PD plans will be shared with parents at PT meeting by school administrators. Parents will be invited to visit schools and join teachers in intervisitations. Parent coordinator will inform parents about upcoming parent workshops and classroom visits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD Committee of 6 members will meet after school to design and present research-based instructional strategies during the weekly PD sessions on Fridays. Curriculum Writing Committee of 5 members of will meet after school and on selected Saturdays to further refine and align subject curricular with the NYS Learning Standards (Literacy). Guidance department of 3 members and a Behavioral Health Coach will conduct workshops for parents and maintain on-going communications with parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Informal teacher survey Teacher Team meeting agendas Teacher Team created teaching artifacts Teacher Team collected data on impact on student learning Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal teacher survey Teacher Team meeting agendas Teacher Team created teaching artifacts Teacher Team collected data on impact on student learning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 95% of parents (score 4.00) provided positive ratings on inclusive leadership. In 2016-2017 School Quality Review, the school received well-developed for leveraging resources (1.3) make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. Priority Needs In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 45% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Action Plan At the beginning of the year a Professional Learning Committee was established, made up of the Principal, the Assistant Principal, teacher leaders from each subject area and the instructional coach from Generation Ready, in deciding the school-wide instructional goals. These goals were based on Quality Review feedback, the Framework for Greater Schools, the summative feedback from Principal Performance Review and the teacher evaluations using Danielson’s Framework. At the beginning of the year we conducted a professional learning needs assessment using structures and protocols from the Handbook for Professional Learning. Teachers worked in teams to reflect, discuss and identify ‘authentic problem areas’, needs that would be most meaningful in determining the needs of the school, needs based on formal and informal data of student achievement and teacher evaluations. Feedback was encouraged and provided in all areas of Framework for Greater School: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties. This teacher inquiry-based feedback was combined with the school wide instructional goals for the year to give a view of our school from multiple perspectives. The Professional Learning Committee used all data in planning a PD/PL Calendar for the year with structures were also established to monitor, meet and make adjustments when needed. The PD/PL Calendar includes cycles of teacher team inquiry and professional support needed. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators and teacher teams will plan and provide PLOs on Instructional Core and FfT at school-wide instructional meetings. By June 2019, school administrators will participate in 7 cycles of Lesson Study with 5 teacher teams. Administration will provide 100% feedback on walkthroughs, informal and formal observations within one week and coordinate internal and external professional learning opportunities as needed. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide a teacher improvement plan with mentoring from highly effective teachers and administration Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers who are below effective September 2018 until June 2019 Administration, Teacher Mentors Provide coverage so teachers can visit other classrooms and/or schools to observe best practices All Teachers September 2018 until June 2019 Ask teachers to tape their class as an assessment tool for themselves Volunteering Teachers September 2018 until June 2019 Administration, Teacher Mentors Administration, Teacher Mentors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PD plans will be shared with parents at PT meeting by school administrators. Parents will be invited to visit schools and join teachers in intervisitations. Parent coordinator will inform parents about upcoming parent workshops and classroom visits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD Committee of 6 members will meet after school to design and present research-based instructional strategies during the weekly PD sessions on Fridays. Curriculum Writing Committee of 5 members of will meet after school and on selected Saturdays to further refine and align subject curricular with the NYS Learning Standards (Literacy). 2018-19 CEP 28  Guidance department of 3 members and a Behavioral Health Coach will conduct workshops for parents and maintain on-going communications with parents. Teacher Teams will open their classrooms for peer visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Individual meetings and progress monitoring of teachers with Teacher Improvement Plan using MOTP reports Participating and attendance at teacher team meetings PLO offerings and agendas Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Individual meetings and progress monitoring of teachers with Teacher Improvement Plan using MOTP reports Participating and attendance at teacher team meetings PLO offerings and agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. Priority Needs In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 44%of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. In 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 50%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, parents/guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe the instructional program. Action Plan At the beginning of the year a Professional Learning Committee was established, made up of the Principal, the Assistant Principal, teacher leaders from each subject area and the instructional coach from Generation Ready, in deciding the school-wide instructional goals. These goals were based on Quality Review feedback, the Framework for Greater Schools, the summative feedback from Principal Performance Review and the teacher evaluations using Danielson’s Framework. At the beginning of the year we conducted a professional learning needs assessment using structures and protocols from the Handbook for Professional Learning. Teachers worked in teams to reflect, discuss and identify ‘authentic problem areas’, needs that would be most meaningful in determining the needs of the school, needs based on formal and informal data of student achievement and teacher evaluations. Feedback was encouraged and provided in all 2018-19 CEP 30  areas of Framework for Greater School: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties. This teacher inquiry-based feedback was combined with the school wide instructional goals for the year to give a view of our school from multiple perspectives. The Professional Learning Committee used all data in planning a PD/PL Calendar for the year with structures were also established to monitor, meet and make adjustments when needed. The PD/PL Calendar includes cycles of teacher team inquiry and professional support needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, increase parent attendance at monthly meetings by 5% through on-going communications with parents and by providing quality parent workshops on topics of parents’ interest. Parent coordinator will notify these activities via email and phone, and also through the school website. Workshops and on-going support about how to support students at home will be provided by the guidance counselors in collaboration with a Behavioral Health Coach from START Treatment and Recovery Centers 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To support higher achievement of ELLs and former ELLs through a strong home-school connection, the parent engagement activities are designed to inform parents of ELL and former ELL students about academic policies, NYS Learning Standards, and state assessments. A series of 7 worships for parents will be held on 3 Saturdays for 120 minutes (9:00am-11:00pm) and 5 Wednesdays for 60 minutes (6:00pm-7:00pm) until mid-June. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018 until June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, CBOs, College Counselor Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, CBOs, College Counselor Workshops and on-going support about how to support students at home will be provided by the guidance counselors in collaboration with a Behavioral Health Coach from START Treatment and Recovery Centers. Parents September 2018 until June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Behavioral Health Coach from START Treatment and Recovery Centers Chinese Planning Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD Committee of 6 members will meet after school to design and present research-based instructional strategies during the weekly PD sessions on Fridays. 2018-19 CEP 32  Curriculum Writing Committee of 5 members of will meet after school and on selected Saturdays to further refine and align subject curricular with the NYS Learning Standards (Literacy). Guidance department of 3 members and a Behavioral Health Coach will conduct workshops for parents and maintain on-going communications with parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Informal survey of parents for the areas of needs and interests Attendance at parent meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance at meetings, Parent participation in school events Parent feedback by phone and email Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Failing MP 2 grade in the course Teacher recommendations Mathematics Science Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) CCLS-aligned tasks Small group After school Social Studies Failing MP 2 grade in the course CCLS-aligned tasks Small group After school Teacher recommendations Failing MP 2 grade in the course Teacher recommendations Individual conference One-to-One During the school day After school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 34  Parent Outreach 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 55 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic/emergency supplies Academic & educational support services (After school AIS and Enrichment programs) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers recruited to work for Dual Language and Asian Studies are hired by the Principal who is advised by a school-level hiring panel. The hiring is comprised of one or more teachers within the license area of said applicant. The applicant pool is created first by considering all candidates in District excess within the specified subject area and then by considering external applicants. External applicants are generated by using the new teacher finder, or uncovered through the open market transfer system or the human resources management system and outreach to universities including NYU, Teachers College, Hunter, Fordham, and the CUNY Schools. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers participate in weekly professional development sessions as well as ongoing professional development offered by our network. This includes Math Institutes and ELA Institutes. We also receive targeted instructional support from our partners, which include local Asian affiliates who support dual language immersion programs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A MOSL Committee comprised of 4 teachers and 1 assistant principal select MOSL assessments through multiple meetings with Principal; additionally, Professional development addresses a thorough analysis of data from MOSL assessments to adjust instruction on a regular basis. School leaders also survey the staff to gauge appropriateness of present use of assessments in regular departmental meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 242178 0 12366 0 2468040 X X X 2018-19 CEP 39  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 40   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Dual Language and Asian Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School for Dual Language & Asian Studies will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 42  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., /State  accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;  2018-19 CEP 43   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Dual Language & Asian Studies in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 44  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act () and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In order to support academic English language development of ELL students and develop NYS Learning Standards-aligned close reading, evidence-based writings, and argumentative writings, four ENL classes will be conducted on Saturdays from February through mid-June. One class is for Entering and Emerging level 9th and 10th graders (8:00am-10:00am). Another class is for Transitioning and Expanding level 9th and 10th graders (10:15am-12:15pm). Two additional classes are for Regents-bound 11th and 12th graders (8:00am-10:00am, and 10:15am-12:15pm). There will be 14 sessions and each session will be 2 hours long. The classes will be taught in English by two TESOL certified teachers. Each teachers will teach 2 sessions (from 8:00am to 10:30am, and from 10:45am to 1:15pm). English is the language of instruction. Through the use of teacher-created, teacher-selected materials and periodicals (Class subscription of NYTimes Upfront magazine, and Scholastic magazines Choice and Action exclusively for Title III programs) students will explore topics including American culture, American rhetoric and literature. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To provide targeted support for different groups of ELL students, ENL teachers teaching the Title III program will meet on two Fridays in January 2019 for 80 minutes, on one Friday in April 2019 for 80 minutes, and on one Friday in June 2019 for 80 minutes for professional development on the following topics. The topics of PD sessions include, The school-based PD are provided by ENL, ELA, and LOTE teachers and administrator at no cost to Title III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 48 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: To support higher achievement of ELLs through a strong home-school connection, the parent engagement activities are designed to inform parents of ELL students about academic policies, NYS Learning Standards, and state assessments. A series of 7 workshops for parents will be held on 3 Saturdays for 120 minutes (9:00am-11:00pm) and 5 Wednesdays for 60 minutes (6:00pm-7:00pm) until mid-June . Wednesday parent workshops; Saturday parent workshops: Parent coordinator will notify these activities via email and phone, and also through the school website. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1952 366 1522.56 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2 Teachers x 4 days x 4 hour/day 3 Teachers x 0 days x 2 hours 1 Supv x 8 days x 3 hour 0 0 8525 Postage, Paper, Writing utensils 0 0 0 0 0 0 12366 2018-19 CEP 49  2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name High School for Dual Language & Asian St Borough Manhattan School Number 545 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Li Yan Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yuk Fung Lam/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Xiu Yan Wu/Math Teacher/Subject Area Min Mei Dean/ Chinese Related-Service Provider Superintendent Marisol Bradbury Assistant Principal Meesun John Coach School Counselor Lai Man Parent Kevin Yienger Parent Coordinator Maureen Hickey Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 397 2018-19 CEP 51 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 24 10 44 11 12 0 0 78 61 100 114 Tot # 68 0 0 353 0 0 102 105 100 114 421 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher-created formative assessments in English and Home Language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly department meetings and common planning 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teacher-created assessments and NYC performance tasks 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 52  Weekly departmental meetings; data analysis activities; ENL level conferences 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Use of ongoing formative assessment to monitor student progress and identify potential at-risk students. Strong Tier I support using individual conferences, differentiated instruction, scaffolding, and multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA, Math Regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly departmental meetings; monthly staff meetings; weekly cabinet meetings; e-mail notifications Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We used self-contained ESL classes; however, all teachers collaborate on instruction across the curriculum. The subject teachers meet with the ENL teachers to plan acquisition of subject specific language. One of our goals has been to increase the use of Chinese for the English dominant students in the subject areas. ESL classes are ungraded but homogeneous b. TBE program. If applicable. In addition to the mandated ENL classes, c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The students take a minimum of the mandated ESL class hours based on their scores on the NYSESLAT exam. Most students have one double period and an additional single period class for additional support in acquiring language, they also take at least 45 minutes of native language arts. We often give students who have tested as proficient although they are still struggling an ESL class in addition to their English Language Arts class to help them with the transition 2018-19 CEP 53  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All beginner students at Dual Language are scheduled for 3 ENL classes to fulfill the mandate of 540 minutes per week. The intermediate students are also scheduled for 3 ENL classes to fulfill the required 360 minutes per week and the advanced students are scheduled for 2 ENL classes and 1 ELA class to fulfill the mandated 180 minutes per week. Students are also matched with buddies and proficient students continue with a double period of ELA instruction. All teachers at Dual Language are also trained to be aware of the additional needs of ELL students because of the school population and the mission of helping students to become proficient in 2 languages. Language classes in English and Chinese include the four components of language acquisition – listening, speaking, reading and writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We look at student transcripts from China and administer an oral and written test for appropriate language placement. During the first week or 2, teachers evaluate the students to see if placements fit the student needs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are given additional help with literacy issues and tutoring with the teacher and NYU students. There is also a Saturday program with additional support. b. We test the students who have not been tested for initial placement and then may change their program based on teacher evaluation. We give students a buddy to work with them. We also have a Saturday program for newcomer students. c & d. Students with 4 to 6 years or more are given additional help with tutoring and extra classes as needed. We have America Reads tutors that help in the classroom and after school or during student’s free periods. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? SWD and ELL students use grade level material for the subject areas and also use teacher made materials as well as additional books, including books in the native language for ELLS to enhance their instruction. Students are matched with peers in the classroom to help them. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Social and academic support services are provided by community based organizations, including Immigrant Social Services, the Chinese American Planning Council, and Asian Americans for Equality. There is also a formal link with New York University to serve as a site for the university to place student teachers and observers in English Education and English as a Second Language. We work with the Borough of Manhattan Community College to offer an after school academic support program 2018-19 CEP 54  that includes writing classes and tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering adding AP Human Geography and AP English Literature. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are able to sign-up for after school programs. There is homework help daily for all students and is offered in both languages. There are classes for writing, tae kwan do, and different types of dance. On Saturday there is a SAT Prep class for the 11th grade students, ESL classes for parents and students as well as swimming and physical education. Students can volunteer with NY Cares for two service projects per month. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The textbook used for ENL classes is visions, this is supplemented with technology, teacher materials, novels and plays including workshops with Classic Theater Company and American Globe theater as well as an annual performance at the school of a Shakespeare play, trips to see performances and visit museums as well as job-shadowing days with different corporations sponsored by Junior Achievement and NY Cares 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL classes are conducted in English. Subject area classes have instruction in both languages for beginner ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students receive a combination of dual language, free standing ENL classes and transitional bilingual classes as well as native language classes based on their levels and needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The textbook used for ENL classes is visions, this is supplemented with technology, teacher materials, novels and plays including workshops with Classic Theater Company and American Globe theater as well as an annual performance at the school of a Shakespeare play, trips to see performances and visit museums as well as job-shadowing days with different corporations sponsored by Junior Achievement and NY Cares 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly arrived students participate in a summer institute which includes trips to become familiar with the city and then doing projects and writing to describe their experience. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 55  Chinese is the only other language offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. 9th grade about 25% target language for EPs, and 60% for ELLs 10th grade about 35% target language for EPS and 60% ELLS 11th grade about 35%target language for EPS and 60% ELLs 12th grade about 35% target language for EPS and 60% ELLs b. English and Chinese are taught separately. Other subjects are integrated with increasing frequency as students gain mastery their second language. c. We use a combination of methods. d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? -There are 2 meetings per month by dept and by grade level for the entire staff to assess the progress of students and study ways to improve their education. The Chinese and ESL departments are both working on curriculum mapping projects this year. -The science, math and social studies departments are working on using more Chinese in the classroom. -New teachers are given mentors as well as working with the AUSSIE consultant, several of the more experience teachers work with student teachers which is another opportunity for them to look at their own best practices and learn from their students as well. -We plan trips to visit other schools to benefit from best practices. During subject area meetings and grade meetings teachers discuss issues and how to resolve them. Teachers have visited feeder schools and talked with the middle school teachers to find out more about where the students were coming from. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 56  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers and the administration meet with other teachers to provide support and understanding of how to help their ELL students. ENL teachers work with subject teacher to plan curriculum for addressing vocabulary, reading and writing issues to support ELL students. Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Annual School Report and other relevant information/documents are distributed to all parents throughout the year. All correspondents and documents are available in both English and Chinese. In addition, individual student report cards are distributed six times a year to students and mailed home to parents. Parents are always invited and welcomed to participated in parent meetings, join the School Leadership Team and to maintain regular communication with guidance and teaching staff via telephone or email with regard to their children’s academic progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents or guardians of the ELLs are invited annually to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. At HSDLAS, our meeting with parents/guardians will be conducted in Chinese. Materials we use at the meeting will be in both English and Chinese. ELL parents at our school always participate fully at the parent teacher conferences. Workshops are offered in dual languages. College information sessions for ELL parents are extremely popular at our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Li Yan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Dual Language School DBN: 02M545 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Li Yan Title Principal Miriam Uzzan Assistant Principal Maureen Hickey Parent Coordinator Yuk Fung Lam ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kevin Yienger Parent Christopher Fuchs Teacher/Subject Area Alice Yanh Teacher/Subject Area Helen Kokkinidis Xiaojian Zhang Coach Coach Lai Man School Counselor Marisol Bradbury Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 11/9/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M545 School Name: High School for Dual Language & Asi Superintendent: Marisol Bradbur The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school consists of students whose parents speak English, Chinese, Bengali and Spanish. All written materials are provided in English, Chinese, Bengali and Spanish. The principal, school secretary, guidance counselor, several teachers are all bilingual and translate any materials the school provides that are not received in both languages. We also have all families complete a home language survey when the students first come to our school. At the parent meetings, orientations and school visits before students choose to attend HSDLAS, this information is given to the parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 60 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Chinese, Spanish, Bengali 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We provide translations for parent contact forms at the beginning of each school year, parent surveys in the spring when they are distributed, media release forms at orientation and the beginning of the school year – also for trips or events in class that require these forms, after school information at the beginning of each semester and whenever there are changes, newsletters that are distributed or posted on school website throughout the year, school calendar that is provided for each semester, information about college annually, report card distribution information 3 times per semester, information about AP exams at the beginning of the year and when tests are being given in May, information about SAT tests and FAFSA workshops for students and parents, information about college meetings for parents in the fall and spring. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have college meetings in the Fall for senior and junior parents and in the spring for juniors and freshmen, the bilingual guidance counselor meets with the parents and translates for meetings with teachers when necessary, We have parent teacher conferences in the fall and spring and translators and staff and student translators are available. Announcements are provided in both languages. There is bilingual staff from CPC, our after school partner, that provide translations as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When students enter the school, they are given a Home Language Survey to complete. School provides translation of any materials sent home to families in both Chinese and English and any other language that is indicated on the survey. Parents are advised that any school materials are available in their language and interpreters are also available. Bilingual faculty members attend meetings with parents to provide translations when necessary. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent surveys are distributed annually in English and translated forms to all parents. The parent coordinator is in constant communication with parents and conveys their needs to administration and guidance so we can offer any support or information they need. Information is posted on the school website and before parent teacher conferences and monthly parent meetings. Parent coordinator, parent association officers, guidance and administration consult with parents to assure that monthly meetings address their needs. 2018-19 CEP 63 
