2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M555 School Name: CENTRAL PARK EAST HIGH SCHOOL Principal: BENNETT LIEBERMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Central Park East HS 310400011555 9-12 School Number (DBN): 04M555 1573 Madison Ave, New York New York 10029 212-860-5929 212-860-6043 Phone Number: Lorna Sloley Fax: Email Address: lsloley@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Bennett Lieberman Melissa Fleming Debbie Turner Debbie Turner Debbie Turner Saul Gomez KaileyWilliams-Downs N/A District Information HS / 04 Richard Cintron Geographical District: Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn New York 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: Fax # 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity Group FSC Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingstone Street AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (718)935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Bennett Lieberman Melissa Fleming Debbie Turner Andre Cloud Debbie Turner Saul Gomez KaileyWilliams-Downs DulceNunez Rose Marie Fuller James Thomas Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debbie Turner Kelly Cooper Melissa Fleming Laura Smykla IvelisseBrannon Matilda Brooker Amanda Torres Member/ Parent Member/ AP Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At Central Park East High School, we understand that each student has the potential for greatness. We also understand that our students' academic and overall success starts with their engagement and transformation in our classrooms. Here at CPEHS, we nurture their development through authentic collaboration between teachers, parents, and the community to inspire and to establish lifelong learning in all our students. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Central Park East High School (CPEHS) is a Title 1 New Visions Affinity citywide high school in District 4 that was the first highly competitive high school in New York City to participate in the enrollment Diversity Initiative. We draw the vast majority of our students from upper Manhattan and the Bronx. CPEHS has developed a wide variety of strategic partnerships, initiatives, and collaborations over the past decade that have improved our students’ academic outcomes significantly, helped to create a rigorous college-going culture, and which have greatly fostered a spirit of community at our school. These partnerships include, but are not limited to: The Center for Supportive Schools, School-Connect, Step-Up, Girls, Inc, The Brotherhood / Sister Sol, New Visions, College Bound Initiative, and the on-site Northside Mental Health Counseling Center. These partnerships improve the outcomes of our general education students as well as our population of students with disabilities (SWDs) and our population of English language learners (ENLs). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 17% of our population are Students With Learning Disabilities (SWDs). Our related service providers and full inclusion academic program address their needs by providing targeted academic supports, ensuring appropriate accommodations are in place, and creating the most appropriate transition plans for post high school success. The 2017-18 graduation rate of our special education population students is commensurate with that of our general education students. Although our ELL population is not statistically significant, we employ a full-time ENL teacher who provides a wide variety of supports to our second language students. Our ENL population also has a graduation rate commensurate with our general education population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At Central Park East High School, we value all six pillars of the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools and are pleased to report that on the new 2017-18 School Quality Report, CPEHS scored an average of 4.55 across all five reported categories of Framework Element scores (Supportive Environment category not yet reported). This is an increase of .07 from last year’s average score (to be revised when all categories are reported). These results significantly outpace the borough and citywide averages in all categories. We are proud to report that, in 2017-18, our focused work on strengthening “Strong Family Community Ties” in the Framework resulted in our most significant increase within a pillar from 3.82 to 4.33 and 3.61 to 4.21 in the Framework and Survey Elements respectively. Our significant focus on and dedicated collaboration between parent and teacher leaders put us above 4.0 in this category for the first time. While we are proud of our gains, our efforts to improve instructional practices, social-emotional initiatives, and family outreach programs never cease. We believe the five goals outlined in this document will support growth in all these areas in the 2018-2019 school year and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M555 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 496 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 4 5 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 75.2% % Reduced Lunch 2.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 51.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 93% 97.3% 31.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 119 82 95.2% 7.9% 15.5% 26.4% 14.1% 2.4% 4 17% 3.6 N/A N/A 98% 98% 96.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of strength:  During the 2017-2018 school year, in collaboration with AP for All, and as part of our Collaborative Teachers goal, all content area teams began working to create vertically-aligned curricula and assessments. This work was led by the school’s Peer Collaborative Teacher. o Teachers engaged in the difficult work of reviewing standards, skills charts, and rubrics to identify those skills most crucial in supporting student success across grades.  English,Science, and Math Departments engaged in at least one short cycle of inquiry  Teachers engaged in structured professional collaborations within disciplines to strengthen their instructional capacity. As a result of the collaborative teams, teachers continually make strong key decisions that support student improvement and strengthen practice.  Teachers and administrators have established school-wide protocols through collaboration and departmental meetings.  Weekly vertical-team/inquiry meetings support collaboration between teachers.  Grade teams meet to focus on student needs and areas of growth.  According to the just released CPEHS School Quality Report Survey Results, CPEHS received an overall numerical score of 4.94 in the Rigorous Instruction category, which is statistically higher than both the citywide and borough averages in this category. Areas of need: Vertical teaming and inquiry work are a long and difficult processes that require a great deal of time to plan and execute. While all teams made a great deal of progress in creating their vertically-aligned curriculum documents during the 2017-2018 school year, time simply did not allow for all teams to finalize these documents. Time constraints also prevented all teams from successfully engaging in cycles of inquiry. Those teams that did complete inquiry cycles know that the processes and procedures can be honed in the coming year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 12  By June 2019, cycles of inquiry and intervention (using brief formative assessments) will lead to a 20% increase in skill mastery for three-to-four focus students in each content inquiry team each term. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Content inquiry teams will continue to hone vertical alignment documents that outline spiraled skills and common assessments. All content teams September 4th, 2018 - April 30th, 2019 CPEHS’s Peer collaborative teacher (PCT) will continue to train and oversee Vertical Teams and report to administration Vertical Team leaders will lead content teams. September 4th, 2018 - April 30th, 2019 September 4th, 2018 - April 30th, 2019 The PCT will monitor each teams’ progress and report to administration. The PCT will monitor each teams’ progress and report to administration.  Content teams will develop common assessments and rubrics to identify high-leverage skill gaps. All content teams All content teams  By April 30, 2019, content teams will engage in at least two cycle of inquiry to identify students that fall outside the sphere of success.  Content teams will collaboratively identify/craft two research-based interventions (one per cycle) to support three-to-four students who fall outside of the sphere of success.  Content teams will evaluate the efficacy of their interventions based on formative assessments and adjust/reteach as necessary each cycle.  Vertical Team Leaders (VTLs) will meet with Peer Collaborative Teacher monthly to report process, progress, and next steps. Team leaders will collaborative problem solve and share ideas. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families in our Rigorous Instruction goal in several ways. At the beginning of the year, we will send a letter home explaining to families the rationale for and process of inquiry. We will outline our goals for students' learning and progress, suggest ways for families to help prepare students, and solicit any ideas or suggestions they may have. This goal will also be approved and monitored by the our SLT. The Peer Collaborative Teacher will be responsible for implementing and overseeing this initiative; and the Parent Coordinator and School Social Worker will act as liaison to families. These faculty members will report to administration regarding planning, process, and development before and after the September 2018, January 2019, and April 20198 exams. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The main resources to leverage this goal will be human and time. Content/Inquiry team leaders will meet monthly for progress monitoring and to share challenges and ideas. Content/Inquiry teams will meet weekly to plan, implement, monitor, & revise vertical alignment documents and engage in cycles of inquiry. Per session from C4E, TL and/or Title 1 SWP will be used if necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On the January 28, 2019 Chancellor’s Professional Development Day, content teams will share the results of inquiry cycles (will also be documented on our shared drive) to ensure that three-to-four students in each content demonstrated a 20% mastery increase in one high-leverage skill. The staff will convene again in April to ensure that students demonstrated similar progress in a second high-leverage skill. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Each content team will develop two common assessments and a rubric to assess skill development and mastery based on content-specific standards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Overview:In the 2017-2018 school year, CPEHS pioneered a Growth Mindset initiative in collaboration with our new PTA Executive Board and Parent Coordinator. This initiative, which familiarized parents with the work of Carol Dweck and the benefits of emphasizing learning and growth over grades, included a series of Parent Engagement Workshops and activities planned and facilitated by faculty members and the PTA. For example, we hosted Growth MIndset workshops in English and Spanish on the September Family Engagement night; and our PTA President and Parent Coordinator hosted a series of Parent Parties throughout the year to build upon parents’ learning and understanding of ways to support their children's growth at home. Overall results from this work last year, including continuing strengths and weaknesses, have been mainly gleaned from the School Quality Guide, the NYC School Survey and our CEP committee's collection of teacher anecdotals. During the 2017-2018 school year, three courses (planned and taught by four teachers) used Mastery Based Learning (MBL) strategies and assessments in an effort to foster a growth mindset in students. In the 2018-2019 school year, we intend to expand our Growth Mindset initiative to include teachers, specifically through the use of MBL. Areas of strength:  Faculty at our school regularly communicate and collaborate with parents to ensure that students receive the academic and social-emotional support they need.  Our first ever Parent Engagement Growth Mindset workshop was an overwhelming successes; and feedback was unilaterally positive. Parents reported the workshops enlightened them on the value of praising their children’s effort and the process of learning. They were excited to learn the difference between growth and fixed mindsets as well as ways to promote growth mindsets in their children. They also reported feeling better equipped to have productive conversations with their kids about grades and school in general. Four teachers have successfully pioneered Mastery Based learning and assessment in their classes. These teachers report that students in their classes are far more invested in skill development and less concerned with scores. Students in these classes report MBL helps them to see the connection between learning, growth, and grades. In addition, students say MBL has helped them to develop more effective, focused study habits. Students in classes with a MBL model report having a clearer understanding of expectations, strengths, and areas for growth. They furthermore feel confident in their ability to learn and grow in these classes because   2018-19 CEP 16  they can continue to retake assessments until they demonstrate mastery. These factors, they claim, alleviate much of the stress associated with rigorous coursework. Areas of need: Students place a heavier emphasis on numerical grades than on learning, effort, and skill development. Students often express feeling very stressed about grades.    Due to the focus on grades, many students self report feeling tempted to engage in academic dishonesty.  Based on teacher survey results regarding last year’s Growth Mindset initiative, we have identified the following needs: 1. There is a need to expand professional learning opportunities on growth mindset language and strategies for use in the classroom so that students feel encouraged about their potential to learn and grow. 2. There is a need for teachers to learn the benefits of MBL (e.g., greater focus on learning and meaningful tasks, fewer incidents of cheating, and more transparency around grades for students, which will lead to a decrease in student stress). This should include: o Expanded opportunities for teachers to learn about MBL structures and strategies. o Support for teachers who want to incorporate MBL in their classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 year, we will double the number of courses previously offered at CPEHS that use Mastery-Based learning and assessments. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Growth Mindset PLC will plan and execute follow-up (from 2017-2018) professional development for all teachers on growth mindset language and strategies. These sessions will take place during the November 6th PD day and during one full-staff morning meeting in February.  Develop a PLC focusing on MBL and assessment to support any teachers beginning their work in MBL and assessments. This group will meet monthly after school.  Provide whole-staff professional learning workshops led by teachers currently using MBL and assessment. These session will take place during full-staff morning meetings in October and February.  Provide professional learning opportunities on ways to specifically address the unique needs of SWDs and ELLs in a mastery model. This will take place during monthly MBL PLC meetings. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? November 1, 2018 - June 28, 2019 September 2018- June 2019 October 2018 - February 2019 Growth Mindset PLC (Math Team Leader, Math VTL, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, and Assistant Principal) Math Team Leader will lead the MBL PLC (math VTL, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, and Assistant Principal). Math Team Leader, Math VTL, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, and Assistant Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Math Team Leader, Math VTL, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, and Assistant Principal General Education, Special Education, & ENL students in select math and ELA sections. General Education, Special Education, & ENL students in select math and ELA sections. General Education, Special Education, & ENL students in select math and ELA sections. General Education, Special Education, & ENL students in select math and ELA sections.. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to work with parents on fostering growth mindset through our Parent Engagement night and PTA activities. We will also inform parents through letters and our website regarding our efforts to support students through MBL and assessments. These notifications will explain how MBL can reduce student anxiety about grades and increase student investment in learning and development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources are the most important resource for accomplishing this goal. Budgetary resources will also be available along with resources within our after-school schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of Semester One (January 2019), we will survey the staff to ensure that at least two additional sections of math and ELA are utilizing mastery-based learning and assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys will be used to: 1. Gauge and quantify the increase in courses with a MBL model by subject. 2. Measure the extent to which students feel MBL focused classes make learning, growth skill gaps, and class grades more transparent by subject. 3. Evaluate the extent to which the MBL model reduces anxiety and academic dishonesty among students by subject. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  According to 2017-2018 school quality guide, CPEHS received an overall rating of 4.71 in this area. Ninety percent of teachers say they design instructional programs together; 97% of teaches say that they make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels; and 100% of teachers agree that the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.  Content and special-education teachers at CPEHS regularly collaborate to design and implement instruction that supports students with disabilities.  The most recent (2016-17) QR also indicated that CPEHS received a Well Developed in its ability to “help students improve from their incoming proficiency levels and pass Regents exams” and a Well Developed in “Closing the Achievement Gap” for students with special needs.  The graduation rate for students with special needs at CPEHS is equivalent to that of our general-education population.  The administrative and programming teams work hard to ensure that, to greatest extent possible, co-teaching pairs remain consistent over the years. Among other benefits, this means that special education teachers are often fully integrated members of content teams. Areas of Need:  Even though special education and content pairs are very consistent overall, there are limits to programming flexibility; and special education and content teachers rarely have common preps. This means that there is often little time for ICT pairs to co- plan lessons and assessments. In an in-house survey administered to staff on our June 7th professional development day, 77% of respondents reported lacking adequate co-planning time with their ICT partners.  On the same in-house survey, 45% of respondents reported “Clearly defined roles and responsibilities” as an area of struggle in their partnerships; and 59% reported “Equity of responsibility in planning” as an area of struggle.  On a professional learning survey administered at the beginning of 2018, nearly half of respondents said they were interested in learning more about co-teaching models and strengthening ICT relationships.  While students with special needs at our school graduate at similar rates as general-education students, they are often less likely to earn credits on time and more likely to earn credits in summer school at the end of the year. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the school year, improved ICT teacher collaboration resulting in the design of more strategic and timely interventions will result in a 10% increase in the number of students with disabilities earning 10 or more credits for the school year (without attending summer school). 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  At the end of May, administer a survey that solicits teachers’ opinions on the strengths and areas of struggle within their ICT partnerships. All teachers May 28-June 6, 2018 PCT and the CEP Planning Committee All teachers June 7, 2018 PCT and CEP Planning Committee All ICT pairs and administration September 4, 2018 -June 26th 2019 PCT, CEP Planning Committee, and Administrative Team  On the June 7th, 2018 PD day, the whole staff will review and analyze the results of the survey in groups. Together, they will craft proposed community norms/expectations for ICT partnerships. When all groups submit their proposed norms and expectations, the staff will vote on their top three.  All ICT partners will establish an agreement at the beginning of each term that outlines mutually approved roles, responsibilities, and expectations for planning, instruction, assessment, and grading. Partners will be accountable for honoring this agreement, which will be revisited twice throughout the term by both the team and administration.  Peer-lead PD on effective models of ICT, research-based All teachers ICT strategies, and roles/ responsibilities of special education and content teachers in the ICT classroom will be delivered during three full-staff Wednesday-morning meetings between September and October. September & October 2018 PCT & CEP Planning Committee  Beginning in October, ICT partners will have 45 minutes All teachers two-to-three Wednesdays a month to meet and plan instruction and assessments. Partners will create a schedule in October to ensure that special education October 2018-June 2019 Administration Team 2018-19 CEP 22 teachers can meet for equal time with all of their content co-teachers. Teachers without ICT sections will join and collaborate with ICT partners that teach ICT sections.  ICT partners will co-create strategic, research-based scaffolds and interventions to address the unique learning needs of SWDs. All teachers Administrative Team September 4, 2019- June 26. 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration, the CEP Planning Committee, and our Peer Collaborative Teacher will work closely with the PTA Executive Board and Parent Coordinator to ensure that families are aware of our initiative to improve ICT partnerships and supports for SWDs as well as to solicit feedback and suggestions. We will communicate with parents via letter as well as through our school’s website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The two primary resources necessary to achieve this goal are human and time. Human resources include our teachers, families, members of our PTA executive board, our Parent Coordinator, and our students. We also adjusted our SBO this year to reflect a new emphasis on the allocation of time for ICT planning. Budgetary resources will also be allocated to pay per session for planning professional learning when necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of term 1, Administration and Guidance will review progress towards our goal based on Term 1 credit accumulation to ensure a minimum 5% increase in credit accumulation among students with disabilities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for this goal will be credit accumulation as reflected on student transcripts. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of strength:  According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, the vast majority of teachers feel that administrators at this school are committed to shared decision making; 94% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders: and 100% feel that they have influence over and enjoy autonomy in planning curriculum and selecting and developing materials.  Administration in this school invests resources (school budget funds, DOE grants, & private grants) to promote teacher leadership and capacity.  During the 2017-2018 school years, Central Park East High School created 15 (exceeding by three our 2017-2018 school goal for Effective School Leadership) new teacher leadership positions, including four Vertical Team Leaders, a Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT), six CEP Committee Leaders, a mentoring coach, a Director of Peer Tutoring, and two Grade-Team Leaders.  This past year, the Principal participated in Superintendent Conyers’ year-long Racial Equity Learning Series; and five members of the CEP committee attended a year-long TLP series focused on Racial Equity and Leadership as part of the DOE’s Rainbow Teacher Leadership Program.  According to the 2017-2018 school survey report, the vast majority of students say they feel their teachers respect their culture, treat students from different cultures or backgrounds equally, and present positive images of people from a wide variety of races, ethnicities, and backgrounds.  Racial equity data from the Office of Leadership reveals that, at Central Park East High School, there are no statistically-significant disparities based on race for identifying students for IEPs, placement in advanced/honors classes, or suspension referrals.  Under the supervision of two teachers, and with the support of administration, our school now has an organization of students entitled “Class of Consciousness,” whose mission is to increase student awareness and promote activism in issues of race, class, and gender. Areas of Need:  While nearly 90% of our students are Hispanic or Black, as with most NYC schools, the vast majority of our staff is White. Research has shown that such a dynamic could be potentially damaging for students. We believe it is essential to explore this impact.  We recognize, that consciously or unconsciously, race, culture, and privilege can affect interactions  between teachers and students and teachers and their colleagues. Some students and teachers of color have expressed feeling misunderstood, disrespected, or undervalued because of their race or culture. Because these instances have been reported mostly to teachers in confidence, we don’t really know the full scope of the problem. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of May 2019, there will be a 20% increase in the number of teachers who have a better understanding of how race and culture impact their interactions with students and teachers of color as measured by participation in our Racial Equity Committee and survey data. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Five members of the CEP Committee will join the City’s Rainbow TLP program and attended a series of eight workshops on promoting racial equity in their schools. Principal October 2017- June 2018 Teacher Leaders, Assistant Principal, Data specialist, and Principal  As part of Affinity HS Superintendent's Racial Equity Principal Initiative , Principal attended a series of six workshops on racial equity. September 2017- June 2018 Affinity HS Superintendent  As part of her mentoring duties, and as a member of the TLP, our PCT attend two full-day PD sessions on Racial Equity hosted by the DOE’s Office of Equity and Access and facilitated by Border Crossers. Peer Collaborative Teacher and new math teachers PCT February 13, 2018 & April 13th, 2018  Amanda Torres, a member of the CEP Planning Teacher Leader June 2, 2018 Principal Committee and facilitator of the Racial Equity Committee, attended a Critically-Conscious Racial Awareness PD at NYU delivered by the Steinhardt Institute in conjunction with ESI (Expanded Success Initiative).  Members of the TLP and CEP Planning committee facilitated a whole-staff PD on June 7 during which groups of teachers evaluated racial demographic data on scholarship, discipline referrals, IEP referrals, and accelerated classes. In addition, the facilitators shared some of their learnings and resources about racial equity in schools, and they recruited members for a new Racial Equity Committee (REC). Committee/TLP members and whole staff June 7, 2018 CEP Planning Committee (Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, & Principal)  Assemble a committee of teachers who will explore the following questions: 1. What is a racial equity lens, and how can we use it to evaluate the racial climate of our school? Racial Equity Committee June 22, 2018- June 26, 2019 CEP Planning Committee (Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, & Principal) 2018-19 CEP 26  2. How does the racial composition of our staff impact our students? 3. How do our values, beliefs, racial/ethnic makeups, and privileges impact our interactions with students and colleagues of color? 4. How can we ensure that students and teachers of all races, ethnicities, and cultures feel safe, valued, and respected at Central Park East HS?  The REC will meet for the first time on June 22nd. Then they will meet once a month after school during the 2017-2018 SY. Members of the committee will read peer-reviewed research, evaluate case studies, and work with the “Class of Consciousness” student organization.  The REC will craft and administer a survey to staff and students. The staff survey will gauge the following: Racial Equity Committee October 2018 The extent to which teachers understand how race and culture impact their interactions with students and colleagues of color. The degree to which teachers feel equipped to handle situations when race is a factor. The student survey will be designed to illuminate the following: The extent to which students feel valued, respected, and understood based on their race or culture. The extent to which students feel that cultural barriers between them and their teachers affect them academically and/or socially. CEP Planning Committee (Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, & Principal) Specific examples of student interactions with faculty where students felt they were misunderstood or disrespected based on race or culture.  The REC will report their survey findings during a full- staff morning meeting in November and begin to compile research and resources to facilitate a full-staff Racial Equity Committee November 20, 2018 - January 28, 2019 CEP Planning Committee (Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, & Principal) 2018-19 CEP 27 PD workshop during the January 28th Chancellor’s Conference day.  Follow-up PD will be provided twice by the REC during morning-meeting time between February and June. Racial Equity Committee February 2019-June 2019 CEP Planning Committee (Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, & Principal) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our first step in including families will be to invite them to be part of our Racial Equity Committee as their input in helping us to understand the complex roles that race and culture play out in their children’s lives is absolutely essential. Throughout this exploratory process, we will work with the Parent Coordinator and PTA Executive Board to communicate our progress with families and to solicit their continued feedback and participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The two primary resource required to leverage this goal will be human and time. Our teacher leaders, members of the administrative team, the Racial Equity Committee members, families and out students will all play vital roles in this process. Budgetary resources will be allocated for planning and meeting-related per session activities when necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of Term one, at least three new teachers will join our school's Racial Equity Committee. minister mid-line surveys to assess the extent to which teachers have a better understanding of how race and culture impact their interactions with students in the classroom based on the PD and other resources provided up to that point, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The primary instrument of measure will be surveys, administered to both students and faculty. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of strength:  According to CPEHS’s latest School Quality Guide, our scores improved in the Strong Family and Community Ties component from 3.82 to 4.33 and 3.61 to 4.21 in the Framework and Survey Elements respectively. These are statistically significant gains that we attribute to last year’s strong push to engage more than ever with families through Family Engagement Night and expanded PTA activities.  94% of respondents on the Parent Survey agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their children’s needs; 95% feel well informed by the communication they receive from the school; and nearly all say that the school communicates with them in a language they can understand.  CPEHS’s September 2017 Family Engagement Night was our most successful by far. The CPEHS Growth Mindset PLC, in collaboration with our PTA President and Parent Coordinator, hosted Growth Mindset workshops for families in both English and Spanish at this event. Feedback from the workshops was overwhelmingly positive. Many parents said it was one of the most informative parent workshops the had ever attended.  This year our school’s PTA President, Debbie Turner, hosted two “Parent Parties” and a number of other  family engagement activities, all of which saw nearly double the attendance and participation. Last year, CPEHS launched our own website to centralize information and access for families. The site includes links to our online grading platform, our school calendar, and the East Harlem Pride PSAL calendar. It includes links to each department, contact information for all teachers, and a Family page that connects families to our Parent Coordinator and lists upcoming PTA events. Areas of need:  While we work hard to communicate with families on a timely basis, it is often difficult to contact all families via conventional forms of paper communication. Addresses change, and letters sometimes get lost or destroyed in the mail. And for teachers, creating family email lists for multiple class sections can be a long and arduous process. Beyond this, experience has taught us that some people are not vigilant about checking or responding to emails.  While our website is the culmination of great effort, we believe that we are not yet utilizing its full capacity for family and community engagement.  There are myriad tech tools that we are not yet using to communicate with families (e.g., Remind); and there are also a host of updates to tools we are using (e.g., guardian access for Google Classroom) that teachers are simply unaware of. Some parents remain uninformed about ways to use online communication and grade-reporting tools, e.g., Google Classroom and Pupil Path.  2018-19 CEP 29  A great deal of research shows that nearly everyone checks text messages, yet, CPEHS has yet to utilize text alerts for families. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At the end of the 2018-2019 school year, CPEHS will earn a score of 4 or above on the Family and Communities Ties component of the school survey. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  At our Freshman orientation, we will advertise the information available to students and families on our school website. May 15, 2018 Administrators and parents of incoming freshman Assistant Principal  Include a workshop during Family Engagement Night to inform families about our use of Remind and Google Classroom guardian access. Families, CEP Planning Committee September 2018 CEP Planning Committee  Create a database of parent cell phone numbers through Google Forms. We will use the school’s website to collect form responses. Parents, Parent Coordinator, Website coordinator September 4, 2018 - January 1, 2019  Create a school-wide Remind account through which parents will receive text-message blasts at least once a month. The blasts will include important information concerning school-wide events (e.g., parent-teacher conferences, PTA Events, half days, awards ceremonies) and student activities. September 4, 2018 - January 1, 2019 Families, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board, & PCT  PCT and GMail Administrator will facilitate a PD session about how to use guardian access for Google Classroom to keep families informed about student assignments. Whole staff, PCT, GMail administrator September 4, 2018 The Peer Collaborative Teacher and Parent Coordinator will coordinate and report to administration The Peer Collaborative Teacher and Parent Coordinator will coordinate and report to administration The Peer Collaborative Teacher and school GMail administrator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have a number of community partnerships which support parent/family engagement. They are: Girls, inc, The Center for Supportive Schools, New Visions, The Brotherhood/Sister Sol, and Step Up. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The two primary resources necessary to achieve this goal are human and time. Human resources include our teachers and teacher leaders, families, members of our PTA executive board, our Parent Coordinator, and our school’s website administrators.Budgetary resources will also be allocated to pay per session for planning professional learning and family events when necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On January 1, 2019, we will evaluate our text alert system by reviewing the cell-phone number database and administering a brief usage poll to families through the Remind System. We will also poll teachers to identify the number of parents using the guardian access feature for Google Classroom. Should any teachers require additional support on using this feature, additional PD will be provided on the January 28, 2019 Chancellor’s Conference Day. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for this goal will be the results of the Strong Family and Community Ties component of the 2018-2019 School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Class grades, standardized test results, ELABenchmark results, teacher or guidance referrals, parent requests Mathematics Class grades, standardized test results, teacher or guidance referrals, parent requests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group AIS, one-to-one, and embedded classroom curriculum supports Before, during and after school hours Small group AIS, one-to-one, and embedded classroom curriculum supports Before, during and after school hours Lightsail literacy program, Membean vocabulary builder, guided reading, interactive notebooks, Cornell Notes, SCUBA annotation literacy techniques across subjects and grades, interactive writing supports, Citelighter and other technology based research supports Math Basic Skill Support for 9th graders who scored below 1.8 on the new CC 8th grade math exam and review for those who have been unable to pass a math Regents exam. Other instructional supports and tutoring also provided for geometry, alg 2, pre-calc, AP Stats and AP calculus. School-wide use of Delta Math online reinforcement program for all students in all subjects 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Social Studies Class grades, standardized test results, teacher or guidance referrals, parent requests Class grades, standardized test results, teacher or guidance referrals, parent requests At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Class grades, standardized test results, teacher or guidance referrals, parent requests Lab and Science Review for those who haven’t been able to pass a science Regents exam in earth science, living environment, chemistry or physics. Global Review (after school classes and one to one tutoring) for those who haven’t been able to pass a Regents exam. All students have passed the US Regents exam Counseling referrals to DOE providers and outside agencies and school based programs with clinical CBO partners Small group AIS, one-to-one, and embedded classroom curriculum supports Before, during and after school hours Small group AIS, one-to-one, and embedded classroom curriculum supports Before, during and after school hours Small group AIS, one-to-one, and embedded classroom curriculum supports Before, during and after school hours 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We had approximately 30 STH Students last year and expect a similar number in this school year 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students are assessed for at-risk mental and physical health issues and are provided with on-site counseling through the Northside mental health clinic. We also use the STH setaside to purchase comprehensive school supplies and clothing to make certain these students do lack in basic resources. We also offer before and after school computer access, laptops to sign out and take home, and peer and teacher tutoring services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● We have relationships with many local teaching colleges and host student teachers from the LP UTR and NYC Teaching Academy, who may eventually become full time teachers. Our partnerships that provide high quality teacher training include, but are not limited to, Barnard, Hunter / New Visions, City College, Teachers College, and NYU trained teaching candidates. We are also active participants in the “Open Market” and find many high quality teaching candidates that are willing to transfer to our school. Our teachers consistently provide us with positive feedback in regards to their mentoring and on-going professional development and almost 100% of them reply on their surveys each year that they would “not like to be teaching at any other school.” We also have new partnerships with the Learning Partners UTR program and the new NYCDOE Teacher Training Academy. We consider ourselves a leader in teacher training. ● We are a “high demand” high poverty urban school for teachers. We receive hundreds of applications for every vacancy we post and therefore are able to hire motivated high quality teachers for the small number of vacancies we have each year. ● For the last few years, we have not lost any teachers to the “Open Market.” The only teachers that have left the school have moved out of state. This is evidence that teacher retention is very strong at CPEHS. ● We encourage teachers to become HQ in multiple subject areas which improves programming flexibility and “quality of work-life” for our teachers.  We encourage our staff to engage in a variety of professional develop opportunities provided by the school, New Visions, and Central DOE. This helps to create our dynamic professional learning community, and as evidenced on our teacher survey results, a very high percentage of our teachers consistently report that they are satisfied with the professional development opportunities provided by the school.  Our teachers' schedules are determined by their state certification and all teachers are teaching within their license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 37  All teachers, administrators and other relevant instructional staff have the opportunity and/or are required to engage in these activities funded by Tax Levy FSF, TL Citywide Instructional Expectations, Private Heckscher Foundation grant funds, and Title 1 funds to fulfill the requirements and responsibilities of transitioning to the new CCSS:  Departmental planning during Circular 6 periods. We host weekly departmental and inter-disciplinary   departmental meeting Faculty Conference time during Circular 6 periods. We also, according to our calendar of planned pd for the whole staff, meet for "all staff" trainings related to mandated and non mandated activities such as Chapter 408, safety, child abuse, and development of CEP goals or other important school initiatives. Summer planning: This year (for the 3rd year in a row) we received a sizable grant from the Heckscher Foundation to encourage our teachers to collaboratively plan with teachers from two nearby schools.  After school planning: This same grant is now paying teachers to continue planning together throughout the school-year.  New Visions sponsored pd: As an Affinity school and a huge supporter of New Visions, my teachers have access to a wide-variety of pd opportunities which focus on instruction, curriculum, and planning. For example, two of our teachers are involved in a federal i3 innovation grant with New Visions called Drive to Write.  Central sponsored pd: We are a LP-UTR school and a Teacher Training Academy School and this year we have a group of teachers that have been accepted into the new Teacher Leader training program.  Other varied pd opportunities. Too many to name! As evidence of our on-going curricular transition, teachers must submit for review and approval all CCSS units to administration by certain specified dates during the year. During ADVANCE mandated one-to-one feedback sessions teachers and administrators discuss on-going development and revision of new curricular materials and their embedded relationship within the Danielson Rubric. On this years' June CC Algebra and ELA Regents exams we had an average 95% pass rate on the two exams and every general education student who took the exam received a college ready score . Additionally, in 2016-17, all teachers in the school received a 17/20 or higher on their 40% Local Measure on their State Evaluation. These student testing outcomes and teacher evaluation outcomes are strong evidence that we have made an exemplary transition to the new CCLS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 38  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As per the 2017-18 NYCDOE SQR, 98% of teachers at our school report that CPEHS has "inclusive leadership" and 93% report that teachers have a lot of influence over assessment decisions at CPEHS. Besides assessments that are tied to Federal, State and City accountability measures, our teachers design and implement a wide variety of formal and informal formative assessments across disciplines that are designed to track daily student progress and identify students that may require short or long term targeted interventions. The school also received a “Well Developed” for this indicator on our last Quality Review report. Our teachers have engaged in a wide variety of pd's, both internal and external that have informed their creation of assessments to track student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $289,526 N/A N/A N/A $3,225,666 X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 2018-19 CEP 39  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 40  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Central Park East High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Central Park East High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ●Parent Coordinator in conjunction with staff, guidance counselors and administration start the school year off during the summer by hosting a summer bridge program. Other parent focused school-year events include but are not limited to: Annual Fall Title 1 Meeting will be held before compliance due date. At this meeting resources and supports will be communicated and provided to parents and the Title 1 budget will be reviewed. Senior Family College Info Brunch Fall 2018 from 10:00 am-12:00 2018-19 CEP 42  Central Park East High School "Family Night/Back to School- fall 2018, 5:30pm-8pm. Fall Parent Teacher Conferences: Community Based Organizations are invited on the first day of Parent-Teacher Conferences such as IDNYC, (appts are made) Community Health network (free blood-pressure screening), MNN El Barrio Firehouse/Media Center (after school program for students), East Harlem Asthma Center (EHACE)-Education, Community Program , Children's Activities,Fresh Food Box, Farmer's Market, and Prevention Programs), ParentJobNet (Connecting Parents with work opportunities- ESL, General Ed Development, ESL Computer Training Courses and more and Lenox Hill Neighborhood House(Food Services-Assitance in Applying for SNAP), PTA Coffee club - Desserts, PTA Sells Dinner during Parent Teacher Conferences. PTA and SLT team including students, assists in huge mailings, advertisement on 4 main bulletin boards. Unity Day (November) community pot luck. We all have a holiday luncheon and eat together in Cafeteria. Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT, Parent Volunteers, Community Service Students, all outreach through various phonecalls, and Parent Coordinator makes one on one personal calls, as well as school messenger. Again, copies of flyers, mailings, advertisement on boards. Annually over 600 people attend this event Breakfast with the Principal- Fall 2018 and Winter 2019. 8:30 am - 10:00 am. These events were called "parent parties" and were jointly planned with the PTA for the first time in 2017-18 which resulted in a tripling of our attendance Timeline and logistics behind parent outreach activities: Parent Coordinator works diligently over the Summer with new PTA/SLT parent teams preparing for the school years' events. Teams are designated responsibilities on outreach into community. The teams meet in the Parent Resource Center and review all new and old CBO's and delegate who will work on a specific project. Documents and parent outreach letters are reviewed and updated. Translation and Interpretation is another team within the parent team. Parent Coordinator covers/overseas if necry - sign language interpreters or interpreters from the Spoken Work for parents by making request in a timely fashion. The team also splits the outreach to CBO's. At end of Summer, all is in place, with minor changes to dates/ times, once teams have met and proposed all to Principal. This also 2018-19 CEP 43  includes CPEHS calendar for the year and Handbook. ● Parent Pride Handbook- Created and prepared by Parent Coordinator, Provides information on the schools' mission and policies, includes a welcome letter, information regarding reaching out/staying connected, how to be involved in your child's school, whose who, student requirements for locker assignment,a bell schedule, CPEHS calendar, DOE calendar, PT Conference Calendar, SLT and PTA meeting dates, guidance counselor info, CPEHS Senior Information Class of 2019 (dues, rings senior trip, photos, prom etc.) It also includes info on on Special Ed, IEP, and ELL parent info/upcoming conferences for the school year. The Parent Pride Handbook assists in providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. It also encourages parents to run for office on Parent Teacher Association or School Leadership Team for the next year and be trained during the 1 day in house training provided by Parent Coordinator or (DOE) for the new incoming Parent Teacher Association or School Leadership Team members. ● Workshops for parents using Pupilpath at all parent meetings/events. An excellent and effective way for parents to monitor assignment completion and mastery. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this Title 1 parent involvement policy during the mandated TItle 1 SLT meeting at the beginning fo the year. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The 2018-19 CEP 44  Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, What about Dad? A New me, Pioneer Parents, understanding pupilpath, and register parents for Parent Involvement events and understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements with in compliance with Section 1118 of Title 1, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act )ESSA). and ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, and weekend to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; ● Pride Pioneer Parents are parents who have been at Central Park East High School more than one year. A parent who volunteers at Central Park East High School and understands the school mission and policy. Pride Pioneer Parents assist new incoming parents and are available to help them adjust, to High School. Pioneer Parents meet 3-4 times a year with freshman parents and have an Q&A Session with questions like, what worked for them, who helped them adjust, what works and what doesn't work. ● Annual Award Ceremony. Celebrating students accomplishments. An invitation is sent home to parents indicating that your child will be receiving an award. Student receives same. Asst. Principal and Parent Coordinator work closely together on this project in conjunction with Learning Environment Surveys, which are distributed during Parent Teacher Conferences and The Annual Award Ceremony. ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Central Park East High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necry and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Parent Coordinator is the Language Access Coordinator, who keeps staff informed. Staff is provided with the over-the-counter telephone number.  Multilingual Welcome and Achieve NYC posters are on display. ● Parent Coordinator notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Breakfast with Principal, CBO Fairs held at school, Award Ceremony, What about Dad; Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);in computer lab (understanding and how to read Pupilpath) ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; (Did someone say Math!), A new workshop will be run by math teachers. This year we will be implementing using digital calculator iT84. ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necry; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Sign and return the Parent Involvement contract to Parent Coordinator. III. Student Responsibilities: ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time, ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time, ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions, ● Show respect for myself, other people and property, ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully, ● Always try my best to learn. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Support for parents and family members of Title 1 students is covered in the previous SPC section. The school's crisis and guidance team are also specifically trained to work intensively with families of Title 1 students. The school's Parent Coordinator has over fifteen years of experience and the school's administration has over fourteen years of experience in addressing the needs of this specific population. Our graduation rate, 6 and 18 month college enrollment rate, and our college readiness rate are evidence that we provide significant support to all of our students, including Title 1 students. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Which Impact and Support School Quality : Parental Involvement and School Quality ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necry; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Sign and return the Parent Involvement contract to Parent Coordinator. The Strong Family and Community Ties goal in this document details how we will be specifically encouraging school-level parental involvement in the 2018-19 school year. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) Central Park East High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act(ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 49  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Parent Coordinator is the Language Access Coordinator, who keeps staff informed. Staff is provided with the over-the-counter telephone number.  Multilingual Welcome and Achieve NYC posters are on display. ● Parent Coordinator notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Breakfast with Principal, parent parties, annual Unity Day luncheon and annual Award Ceremony. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 50  ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);in computer lab (understanding and how to read Pupilpath) ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; (Did someone say Math!), A new workshop will be run by math teachers. This year we will be implementing using digital calculator iT84. ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Sign and return the Parent Involvement contract to Parent Coordinator. III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Central Park East High School Borough Manhattan School Number 555 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Bennett Lieberman Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gabriela Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Vilma Miranda Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Mayra Messi Coach NA School Counselor Amy Paskal Parent Parent Coordinator Sherry Lisbon Field Support Center Staff Member Hana Mosa Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 480 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.71%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The ENL teacher uses reading comprehension passages and questions, extended writing responses, NYSESLAT, and computer based literacy program, such as LightSail, readtheory.org and noreadink.com. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Provide access to technology, as well as, time for ENL teacher to co-plan with content area teachers to use content based passages in ENL instruction/class. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs based on their progress towards proficiency in all of the modalities, we also look at our ELLs pass rates on all of the regents exams required for graduation, credit accumulation and college readiness 2018-19 CEP 54  percentages. Our ELLs pass the English Regents, and their other regents exams at the same rate as our non-ELL students. We have met our AYP every year over the last 9 years. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We focus on areas that need to be targeted across the content area classes to reinforce literacy skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The majority of the students are strong in listening and speaking categories, scoring mainly in the proficient and advanced levels. The majority of students continue to show more weakness in reading and writing, with approximately one-third scoring in the intermediate level and two-thirds in the advanced level. Of our 8 Long-Term ELLs, those students who have been receiving service for seven or more years, seven (7) are students with learning disabilities and/or speech and language impairments. Though all modalities are used in instruction, academic emphasis is placed on reading comprehension, grammar, sentence structure, vocabulary, and writing skills. These students have acquired basic BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills), yet are very weak in academic cognition, or CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). With an emphasis on these specific modalities, most students move to the next profiiency within 1-2 years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL students that receive speech and language services will continue to work on those skills in the classroom. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs at CPEHS receive their entitled services based on the CR Part 154, and receive all instruction in English with native language support. Students receive ENL services through a stand alone self contained ENL classes, and "push-in" teaching. Students are programmed into ENL classes homogenously based on their proficiency level, and receive "push in" support in their ELA classes based on their grade level, wherein the ENL teacher and English teacher collaborate in using ENL methodology and instructional strategies. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced students are placed in an appropriate level stand-alone ENL class, which meets 5 periods each week for a total of 265 minutes. All Beginner ELLs will also receive 150 minutes of AIS Instruction in a designated 2018-19 CEP 55  AIS class and ENL push-in support 5 periods per for 265 minutes which makes for a total of 680 minutes of self-contained and inclusion ENL instruction - which exceeds the mandate. All Intermediate ELLs will also receive an additional 265 minutes of self-contained Instruction, 265 minutes of ENL push-in support 5 periods per week for 265 minutes and AIS Instruction for 150 minutes per week with the ENL teacher which also makes for a total of 680 minutes, which also exceeds the mandate. In addition, all former ELLs continue to receive their mandated 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL students receive content area instruction for Math, Social Studies and Science in English. The content area teachers incorporate Q-TEL ENL instructional strategies to support students' in understanding and learning the content area material. Native language support is also available through the use of Dual language (native language & English) dictionaries, as well as on-line resources. All content areas heavily emphasize reading and writing strategies to build language comprehension and effective English language expression both orally and written. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do no have any students any entering or emerging ELLs, therefore they are assessed in English only and are provided with Regents exams in their home language in addition to the English version. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students, of which we currently have two (2), are enrolled in a self-contained ENL class based on proficiency level and receive the same instruction as the non-SIFE students; however, those students receive extra academic skills support during the students' lunch period and/or after school if there is a need. For newcomers with very limited English proficiency, in addition to the self-contained ENL instruction, we utilize Rosetta Stone to increase their English acquisition and pair them with a more advanced student who speaks their native language to provide extra support. For Developing and long-term ELLs, we have found that many of their deficits are in Reading Comprehension & Writing, therefore, the ENL teacher supports the content area teachers' instructional goals by helping students to develop the necessary skills to be successful on Regents exams and graduate from high school. ELL’s reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT will be mainstreamed into ELA classes and given the option of 1 year of additional self-contained ENL instruction. These students will also engage in the same academic instruction as all other mainstream students as defined by the school’s English Department staff. Instructional materials reflect various language and literacy skills, reinforced with differentiated instruction ranging in all grade levels. Each unit and lessons within the units are comprised of content and cultural issues pertinent to the material being presented. Visualization, scaffolding, modeling strategies, and differentiated instruction are all instructional tools that are intertwined and incorporated into all unit studies as well as daily lesson plans. Materials that are implemented in the classroom reflecting various levels of literacy and language ability - from beginners to advanced level and from newcomers to long term ENL students. For our former ELLs, additional support is provided by the ENL teacher on a needs basis, as well as ensuring the provisions, of accommodations on City and State assessments and exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content-area teachers are encouraged to attend workshops, such as the Q-TEL workshops to learn various techniques that they can incorporate in their instruction of their content area that will better meet the needs of the ELL students. ELL students are also programmed into morning academic intervention classes with the ENL teacher. Students who need additional academic support can receive free peer-tutoring after school or can enroll in one-on-one tutoring services that are provided free of charge through a community partnership with East Harlem Tutorial Program. 2018-19 CEP 56  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL’s with special needs will be appropriately placed into ICT and SETSS program classes as per their IEP recommendations, as well as be programmed into the appropriate ENL class. ATS reports showing students eligible for ENL services and proficiency levels, as well as ATS report indicating SWD and the individual student's IEP will be used to ensure that the student is programmed to receive all services of which they are entitled. The ESL teacher collaborates with the Special Education teachers on best instructional practices to reinforce students understanding of content area material while also reinforces English language development. Because we have a Stand alone ENL class and both ICT and SETSS programs, our SWDs that are ELLs are in mainstream classes with non ELL and non SWD students. The only period of the day where ELLs are self contained is during their stand alone ENL class. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9 of the 13 ELL students are 9th & 10th graders. Two (2) of 11th grade ENL students are Intellectually Disabled and are Alternate Assessment, and the other two (2) are Expanding based on the 2016 NYSESLAT. One has three (3) years of service while the other has five (5) years of service. It is our expectation that both will test out of ENL based on the fact that they received college ready scores of 85 and above on the ELA Regents in January. We are awaiting the 2017 NYSESLAT results to make the final determination. NLA will be reinforced using dictionaries in ELL’s primary language. A specific focus on essay writing and reading comprehension skills to build the necessary skills for success on the ELA Regents has also been developed and implemented. Dictionaries and glossaries are available in all content area classes for ENL students. All content areas integrate the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) while engaging students with contextualized input that encourages critical thinking that serves a purpose in the real world. ELLs are given support in learning content and academic language by having them focus on vocabulary development, use adapted materials, and receive instruction in small groups. CPEHS has extensive classroom libraries as well as a new formal library staffed by a Certified Librarian with books to serve all levels; there is also a computer lab, Media Center in the Library, and multiple classroom based laptop carts that all CPEHS teachers utilize to improve the literacy, research and language acquisition skills of its students. English is the language of instruction in all content-area classes except for Heritage Spanish, which is offered to 10th and 11th grade students. The ELLs are engaged in a standards-based curriculum that’s meant to strengthen their integrated skills while also helping them develop the higher-order thinking skills they need in order to pass standardized tests in the content areas. Teachers utilize various materials for students to use in accessing content information at various levels. Multiple texts , as well as digital supports are in place so that students have multiple entry points to the content information. In addition, the school utilizes LightSail Web Based Program for struggling readers and writers and assigns the use of this program through the ENL class. Tutoring is available after school in all of the content areas for those students who need additional support and mediation. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Currently the ENL teacher is exploring greater use of the web-based language program, LightSail, that students can access both at school and at home, that will also provide useful data to drive instructional goals and plans. This web-based program also allows for a greater level of differentiated language instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NONE 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are included in all curricular and extra-curricular activities offered at the school. Daily announcements are made during students' third period class of all school offerings and flyers are posted and handed out to all students during their 3rd period class. Grade specific curricular and extra-curricular activities are planned and coordinated by their respective academic counselor and info sessions are facilitated by the counselor for these programs to all students eligible for the program 2018-19 CEP 57  regardless of ENL status or LD status. Similarly, all PSAL sports are open to all students that meet the PSAL academic eligibility. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. High interest young adult novels, Rosetta Stone, word processing, noredink.com, quizlit.com, and readtheory.org, powerpoints created with illustrations to support reading comprehension of difficult texts, graphic organizers, and word translation programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have access to dictionaries, online word translation programs, and utilize Google Images that offer illustrations. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All resources are appropriate for high school students. Our school computers have NYC DOE filters and blocks to prevent access to any inappropriate material. Reading texts are chosen for their young adult high interest. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? High interest young adult novels, Rosetta Stone, word processing, noredink.com, quizlit.com, and readtheory.org, powerpoints created with illustrations to support reading comprehension of difficult texts, graphic organizers, and word translation programs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the spring prior to the beginning of the next school year, the school holds an orientation wherein academic programs, special instruction programs (including the ENL program) are introduced and explained. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish, which is what is offered to all students at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development takes many forms for the ENL teacher as well as the entire general education and special education staff. The ENL teacher attends inter-visitations, Network and district professional trainings. The ENL teacher will also attend full and half day professional development as directed by the principal. In turn, the Gabriela Rivera, ENL teacher and Mayra Messi, AP Supervision will complete a minimum of two professional development sessions for the entire staff during regular scheduled afternoon professional development sessions which will focus on ENL instructional issues that all teachers face in 2018-19 CEP 58  their classrooms. Additionally, the professional development that CPEHS teachers participate in on a weekly basis addresses not only the issues of the four modalities, but also the development of critical thinking skills in every subject area. Teachers share student work in order to assess and re-assess the amount of academic rigor and project-based learning that goes into any given unit, and all teachers at each grade level have team meetings once a week to plan and discuss student progress. The ENL teacher meets with the grade team leaders once a week to discuss issues pertaining to the ELLs. Agendas, with staff attendance is taken at all of the professional development sessions and meetings and maintained by the principal's secretary. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff is trained in specific reading and writing strategies that are utilized by all teachers in all content areas that support student's language growth and development and enhance their understanding of content material. Gabriela Rivera, , the ENL teacher receives the weekly newsletter from our support organization, New Visions, with notifications of ENL teacher training. She attends all available ENL trainings both with regards to instruction, assessment, and compliance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The guidance counselors, Amy Paskal and Elizabeth Schrittwieser, sent letters to parents, inviting them to schedule meeting with their teacher to discuss the students' progress every semester. The ENL teacher follows up with phone calls to encourage parents to schedule and attend a meeting with her to review their child's progress. These meetings are schedule during parent engagement time in the morning, during the ENL teacher's circular 6 th period, or after school. In attendance at the parent meeting are the ENL teacher, and content area teachers that can discuss how the student is progressing in both the content material and their English language development. Over the phone interpretation services are utilized during these meetings through the NYC DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are invited to participate in all parent events at the school, as well as ENL Parent Workshops which take place weekly. All notifications and invitations are sent to them in their native language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Bennett Lieberman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Central Park East High School School DBN: 04M555 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Bennett Lieberman Title Principal Mayra Messi Assistant Principal Sherry Lisbon Parent Coordinator Gabriela Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher Debbie Turner Parent Sherri Shaarbafan Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Amy Paskal School Counselor Donald Conyers Samuel Rodriguez NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member . Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M555 School Name: Central Park East High School Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sherry Lisbon Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using the results of the home language survey data recorded in ATS, the school has assessed whether it is reaching all of the families with written school information that is in their own language. Teachers also have informal surveys that they give to their students at the start of each semester to know what languages are spoken in the homes of their students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian 3 .63 3 .63 2018-19 CEP 63  Amharic Arabic Bengali Chinese English French Fulani Georgian Mandarin Mandinka Nahuatal Punjabi Spanish Vietnamese 1 1 7 8 285 1 2 1 0 1 1 2 156 3 .21 .21 .14 .17 1 1 8 7 60.38 287 .21 .42 .21 0 .21 .21 .42 33.1 .63 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 155 2 .21 .21 .17 .14 60.80 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .42 32.8 .42 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September, 2017 Parent-Teacher Conference Notices Student/Parent Handbook September, 2017 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 64  School Program/Bell Schedule September, 2017 Monthly Calendar of Events/Activities Recurring monthly basis from September, 2017 until June, 2018 Ongoing Student Progress Reports 6x per year: Academic Jeopardy Letters October, 2017 December, 2017 January, 2018 March, 2018 April, 2018 June, 2018 6x per year: October, 2017 November, 2017 January, 2018 February, 2018 April, 2018 May, 2018 Special Event Invitations September, 2017 through June, 2018 services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. Parent's child/student will review their program with their parent. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. Translated versions of the documents will be translated using both in house staff that speak Spanish and the Translation & Interpretation Unit services provided by the Department of Education in advance so as to have them prepared in time to distribute. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences November, 2017 & March, 2018 Open School Night September, 2017 College Workshop September, 2017 Financial Aid Workshop September, 2017 & February, 2018 interpretation service(s)? Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. We often pair bilingual parents with non-English speaking parents of the same primary language so that the bilingual parent can explain to the other parent(s) what is being discussed. Written papers will be provided in the parents preferred language as provided to us by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. We pre-arrange to have parallel workshops taking place at the same time in English and in Spanish, which are our two dominant languages. We often pair bilingual parents with non-English speaking parents of the same primary language so that the bilingual parent can explain to the other parent(s) what is being discussed. Written papers will be provided in the parents preferred language as provided to us by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. We pre-arrange to have parallel workshops taking place at the same time in English and in Spanish, which are our two dominant languages. We often pair bilingual parents with non-2018-19 CEP 66  IEP/504 Meetings Sept, 2017-June, 2018 Academic Conferences with Parents Sept, 2017-June, 2018 Disciplinary Meetings Sept, 2017-June, 2018 English speaking parents of the same primary language so that the bilingual parent can explain to the other parent(s) what is being discussed. Written papers will be provided in the parents preferred language as provided to us by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators all have the phone number to contact the Translation & Interpretation Unit for spoken translation services needed for those parents who do not speak English. We also utilize staff who speak another language to assist when appropriate and possible. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 67  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Teachers, guidance staff, and administrators will be informed with the available translations services at the first Staff Meeting of the year in September, and provided with a Brochure that explains the services and has necessary contact information for teachers to utilize. Teacher will also be give a flier that they will all have posted by their phone in their classroom/office. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) a. The school will have each child fill out a home language survey within thirty days of enrollment b. The Home Language Records will be maintained in ATS c. Based on the results of the HLS, the school will send home notification in the covered language of their rights to translation and interpretation services and how to obtain these services. The school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services and contact information to utilize those services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, which we will access at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/default.htm. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? School will meet with parents/guardians of ELLs individually at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations. If the parent would like to transfer the child, the school must send an email requesting to transfer the student to ELLProgramTransfers@schools.nyc.gov. The DOE’s Department of English Language Learners and Student Support coordinates these transfer requests with the Office of Student Enrollment and will follow up with the school and family regarding a new placement within the designated timeframe. For tracking purposes, students without completed Parent Survey & Program Selection Forms should be recorded as "No Parent Survey & Program Selection Form" in ATS but should be counted as a selection for a bilingual program for the purposes of placement and program opening. ELL Policy and Reference Guide Helpful Hints: Re-Identification of ELL Status Process • Schools should establish protocols and assign qualified and trained staff to manage both the initial and Re-identification Process. If a student’s ELL status is determined to be a non-ELL as a result of the Re-identification Process, the student will not be counted as an ELL for statistical or reporting needs. Additionally, the student will be considered a “never” ELL and is not entitled to ELL testing accommodations or to be reviewed under ELL promotion policy. The student will not need to take the NYSESLAT. Quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings will be provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting will include school staff, ie. ENL teacher, necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These 2018-19 CEP 68  services will be provided to the parent through the Translation & Interpretation Unit's call-in phone service. These meeting will be held during school hours as part of the ENL's teacher circular 6 period, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. We will record attendance at these meetings using existing procedures. 2018-19 CEP 69 
