2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M565 School Name: URBAN ACADEMY LABORATORY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ADAM GRUMBACH 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Urban Academy Laboratory High School 310200011565 9-12 317 East 67 th Street 212-570-5284 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M565 212-570-5366 Fax: Adam Grumbach agrumbach@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Adam Grumbach Avram Barlowe Kimberly Gross Kimberly Gross n/a Harley Grossman JaiPerez n/a District Information Consortium/Internationals Paul Rotondo Geographical District: Superintendent: 198 Forsyth Street New York, NY 10002 protond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: (646) 654-1261, ext. 9 (212) 432-8035 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Field Support Office FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 606 Aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718.935.5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Adam Grumbach Avram Barlowe Kimberly Gross Danyelle Gonzalez Harley Grossman JaiPerez Kimberly Gross Xiomara Perez Shelly Robotham *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rebecca Walzer Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Urban Academy's approach to teaching is based on the assumption that the more deeply invested students are in their own learning the more they will be learners. Our mission is to develop students' skills of critical analysis, to become life-long learners able to confront any topic, research it, and have confidence in their ability to defend what, in some cases, may be minority opinions. 2018-19 CEP 9  The ultimate goal is to produce independent, thinking, and articulate citizens. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Urban Academy's students represent a genuine cross-section of the the City. Students come from all backgrounds from across the 5 boros, seeking a different type of education than the one they have encountered in their previous schools. We expect students to use their minds (and we take their ideas and choices seriously), and we expect them to listen and learn from the wide variety of voices represented in the student body. We get them out and around the city frequently, placed in more than 100 sites for weekly community service, and engaged with cultural partners like the Manhattan Theater Club. Urban seeks to create opportunities through which students will be able to express and rethink powerful ideas. By placing students at the center of the learning process, the school attempts to empower students to take ownership of their own learning, thus fostering independence, persistence, and self-awareness. Urban Academy regards this philosophy-which the school defines as inquiry learning - essential to its vision of school organization (e.g., scheduling, curriculum development, student assessment, and graduation requirements) and professional development. In practice, the philosophy has been further refined by the population served by the school. For Urban Academy, a focus on critical thinking and problem solving must be grounded in the belief that reading, debate, writing, reflection, and respect for the ideas of others are essential aspects of learning. Thus the school's focus on active learning, on consideration of the controversial, and the formulation and analysis of authentic questions form the basis of its views regarding curriculum process and content. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Many Urban students are youngsters whose previous school experience was quite problematic: many came with histories of chronic absenteeism, suspensions, academic failure, and low esteem. Almost without exception, their previous school experience emphasized curriculum content at the expense of critical thinking; there was little interest in students' ideas or points of view. Student skills in verbal discourse were largely ignored. Urban has a small populaton of English Language Learners -- rarely more than 3%, although many of our students do come from households with a second language (usually Spanish, French, or Mandarin). In any given year 15-20 percent of our students have IEPs; another 10-15 percent could qualify, but their parents are reluctant to request evaluations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Staff members represent expertise in all subject areas and have been working collaboratively on developing curricula that value the inquiry approach to teaching and learning. The NYC Board of Education recognized the school's commitment to inquiry by designating Urban Academy as a laboratory school. The rigor of the instruction has been recognized by many outside the school, and is apparent to all of the stakeholders within it -- teachers, students and their parents. 2018-19 CEP 10  The collaborative efforts of the staff have been recognized by the Public Education Association which awarded the entire faculty its Maurice Hexter Award for Excellence in Teaching. Also, Urban Academy has been rewarded for its efforts by receiving the Blue Ribbon Award of Excellence from the U.S. Office of Education and being named a New American High School, a national site. For first 29 years of its existence, Urban Academy was led by Herb Mack as principal. In April of 2014, upon Herb’s retirement, Adam Grumbach became the principal, with Becky Walzer as Co-Director. Student achievement has not suffered, and the transition has been relatively smooth, indicating that the change in leadership did not damage the school, a testament to the collaborative nature of the school. Students, parents and staff all pulled together to preserve the academic rigor of the school. The continued success represents the progress made by the staff in collaboratively running the school, as well as the leadership shown by the new principal, who has guided the school through the transition in leadership. This year, we intend to focus on strengthening communities ties both in ensuring that the families of seniors are supported and supporting their students in achieving their goal of graduation in June, and in maintaining a safe and welcoming environment in the school. Our graduation rate this past year was 85% (highest in memory). Our school survey results were overwhelmingly positive, with families, students and teachers expressing broad satisfaction with the academics and culture of Urban (greater than 95% positive response in almost every metric). 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M565 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 160 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 57.0% % Attendance Rate 46.9% % Reduced Lunch 0.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 37.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 26.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.51 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 85% 25% 48.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO No N/A 5 6 90.7% 9.4% 13.8% 30.6% 4.4% 1.3% 0 0% N/A N/A N/A 61% 9% 76.0% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Urban Academy, as a member of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium, graduates students using performances based assessment tasks, which we call “proficiencies.” There are six proficiencies in the major disciplines: Creative Arts, Mathematics, Literature, Social Studies, Science and Art Criticism. Because Urban is a transfer school with a mixed population in almost every imaginable way but most saliently in terms of skill level, we do not have formally designated “grades” for each student. Since all of our classes are mixed with 9-12 graders, there is no need to have designated grades for students, and not having them helps alleviate the stigma of students who take an extra year or two to complete high school – no one is referred to as “left back” or “repeating a grade.” However, for college counseling purposes, it is important that we identify who is in their final year of high school – who is a senior. If a student who believes him/herself a senior applies to college and is admitted but then fails to graduate because he/she was not far enough along in the proficiencies, it is a serious problem. Accordingly, Urban has developed strict guidelines for determining which students are “seniors” – two semesters left, and who is a “graduating senior” – one semester left. This year, our school received a rating of "well developed" for 7 of 10 criteria on our quality review; the other three criteria received ratings of "proficient." Much of the basis for our QR rating was our system of assessment, which represents the culmination of the skills we teach; accordingly, our system of progress towards graduation, which is the subject of this goal, is intertwined with our rigorous instruction.) The strengths of our designation of seniors and graduating seniors include: to the extent we hold students to high standards, they graduate with solid skills that enable them to succeed in college, as evidenced by the high rates of matriculation and persistence of our graduates (this last year 100% of our graduates are matriculating at college; as mentioned above, the requirement that they be fully on track towards graduation helps us avoid the disastrous situation of a student being accepted to college but failing to graduate; also as mentioned above, not designating students into other grades prevents the stigma of being "left back." The problem with these designations is that some juniors have a hard time qualifying as “seniors” and thus feel daunted at the prospect of an extra semester, and some seniors fail to qualify as “graduating seniors.” We have created the categories of “conditional seniors” for those juniors who are close but need a little more time into the Fall 2018-19 CEP 13  semester (particularly those who have joined our school with only four semesters left before graduation), but we are not entirely successful at monitoring their progress and supporting them to reach senior status as quickly as possible; the same is true for graduating seniors in the second semester. We made progress last year, and so this year we are upping our percentage target. Our goal, therefore, is to ensure that 90% of “conditional seniors” are qualified as actual seniors by Columbus Day, and that the rest are qualified by mid-terms; and to ensure that 80% of seniors are qualified as “graduating seniors” by March 1 and that the rest are qualified by mid-terms. We hit these goals last year and we aim to repeat this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal, therefore, is to ensure that 90% of “conditional seniors” are qualified as actual seniors by Columbus Day, and that the rest are qualified by mid-terms; and to ensure that 90% of seniors are qualified as “graduating seniors” by March 1 and that the rest are qualified by mid-terms. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Performance based assessments and inquiry teaching are research-based instructional programs that anticipated the Common Core’s emphasis on critical thinking. 100% of our core classes will focus on providing students with the skills and assignments to meet the requirements for graduation in a timely fashion. Conditional seniors and seniors To meet the needs of students with special needs, 90% those students in the targeted categories will be provided special programs to ensure success – workshops, drop-ins, one-on-one tutoring. Conditional seniors and seniors with special needs. 100% of parents will be kept informed via email and USPS mail of their child’s progress towards graduation – which requirements have been fulfilled and which remain. The parents/guardians of conditional seniors and seniors Tutorial teachers for the students will ensure progress; staff committees will review overall progress and ensure assignments are offered in a timely fashion. Tutorial teachers will be responsible for providing guidance in programming; tutor-coordinators will provide tutors. Tutorial teachers and school co-directors (when necessary) will keep parents/guardians apprised. Columbus Day, mid-term fall semester, March 1 and mid-term spring semester Columbus Day, mid-term fall semester, March 1 and mid-term spring semester Columbus Day, mid-term fall semester, March 1 and mid-term spring semester, and finally, by June 2018. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have parent meetings every month during which we explain the graduation requirements at Urban and how they are achieved over time by students. At every quarter, parents receive narrative comments explaining progress in 2018-19 CEP 15  classes, as well as an overall progress report. Tutorial teachers communicate with parents frequently to explain what is expected and what is being achieved by individual students. All 15 staff members are responsible for this communication, but the two co-directors ensure that there is on-going communication with all families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will provide workshops and “drop-ins”; volunteer tutors will offer tutoring; programming is undertaken by the entire staff, but tutorial teachers will control the special needs of their students. Mandated counseling per session hours are set aside in the budget. Per session is also paid to teachers who work after school to provide additional academic support to students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The staff will monitor the progress towards this goal at at the stated times – Columbus day, mid-term, March 1 and mid-term, as well as at the end of each semester. If the plans developed are being implemented (or modified and implemented in modified form) at a 75% rate, we will consider that successful. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Urban Academy has developed (and published) a clear set of benchmarks to determine senior status and graduating senior status. These benchmarks are the "instrument of measure" for this goal and are available both on our website (http://bit.ly/290OMFR, p. 9) and in hard copy form at the school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Urban Academy students often struggle with issues around lateness and attendance; as a transfer school, many of the students who are entering had not been attending school regularly in their previous schools. Accordingly, we try to work with students to change their habits over time; if they are two hours late every day, can they start by being only an hour late; if they missed two days a week, how about cutting that down to one. When students arrive late, we talk to them about what got in the way of an on time arrival, rather than making them feel like a failure. After all, we don't want a student who wakes up late to feel like they will get yelled at when they do manage to arrive. We want them to know we are happy to see them whenever they arrive, but we want them to also understand that their success in school depends upon regular attendance. Last year, we made a decision to cut down on our chronic absenteeism rate, and made it a goal of that CEP to reduce it by 3%. We still have some work to do, and we intend to further reduce the rate. The risk in a school as small as Urban (where each student represents two-thirds of a percentage point) is that statistics lack validity and changes may lack statistical significance. Nevertheless, we aim to take steps to reduce chronic absenteeism in a measurable way. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We aim to reduce our chronic absenteeism by 2% this year. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). First, we will attempt to contact those students who have been no shows for more than a semester. If they are unresponsive, we will conduct home visits. If they do not wish to return to school, we will hold a planning conference and discharge them. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 Attendance teacher, Community associate, school counselor, principal. Students who have not shown up for more than a semester We will continue our tutorial system, which provides individual students significant attention from the staff and enables them to communicate problems, especially around attendance, before they become serious. All students. September Tutorial teachers. 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 All students have multiple adults to choose from when they need to confide in someone about a problem that is arising. The majority of our students are described by bullet 2. All students. September All staff members. All students and parents. 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 Entire school community. Parents will be kept in the loop regarding school rules and expectations around attendance, at parent-teacher conferences, in regular communications to them (via email, regular mail, and phone calls). Parents of students who demonstrate a pattern of poor attendance will be contacted to discuss the situation and develop solutions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At monthly parent meetings, we explain the Urban Academy "understandings," which is a set of guidelines for student behaviors that enable students to express themselves forcefully and effectively without personally attacking each other. We also explain how we work with students first, involving their parents on an as needed basis. We have found that although some parents are helpful at waking their children up, for many, expecting them to solve the attendance issues challenging their children only causes more stress at home and does not result in better attendance and 2018-19 CEP 18  punctuality. By working with families to help them understand how to help their children take control of their education and their habits, we aim to reduce chronic absenteeism. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tutorial teachers, the school counselor, the attendance teacher (assigned to the school part time), the Administrative Assistant, the principal will all be involved at different points in this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Will will monitor the number of LTA's and chronic absenteeism at the mid-year (January 31, 2018). We will consider it a success if the numbers have dropped by 2% since last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use reports generated by ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In past years, Urban Academy has been designated as a PROSE school, and accordingly given flexibility in complying with the new state mandates regarding the observation and evaluation of teachers; and we have been informed that this status is very likely to continue for the 2018-19 school year, and that we should proceed as though it will. We have developed a system of peer observations and classroom visitations that will require all staff members to visit each others' classrooms at least two times each semester. These observations, of course, are only one part of the collaborative system of professional development that pervades almost every aspect of the school. Our goal for this year is to ensure that the observations take place in a timely manner and to review the conclusions drawn from them with an eye to improving instruction overall. Staff members represent expertise in all subject areas and have been working collaboratively on developing curricula that value the inquiry approach to teaching and learning. The NYC Board of Education recognized the school's commitment to inquiry by designating Urban Academy as a laboratory school. (In addition, the collaborative efforts of the staff have been recognized by the Public Education Association which awarded the entire faculty its Maurice Hexter Award for Excellence in Teaching. Also, Urban Academy has been rewarded for its efforts by receiving the Blue Ribbon Award of Excellence from the U.S. Office of Education and being named a New American High School, a national site.) Collaborative planning has been an integral feature of the Urban Academy since its inception. Staff is deeply involved with planning at all levels: curriculum, administration, student services, assessment and policy. At Urban Academy, collaborative planning not only provides a guiding philosophy but also determines the structure of the school. Staff meetings occur regularly, affording teachers the time and space to work together for extended periods. Each Wednesday afternoon, while students participate in our community service program, staff meets for three-four hours. Each staff member may contribute to the agenda for the meeting, and all concerns, from individual student's progress to plans for school-wide events to parent suggestions, are items for discussion and evaluation. Our extensive experience with collaborative planning has led quite naturally to the practice of team-teaching. Teachers with expertise in different subject areas may choose to collaborate on a course offering; some examples include The Immigration Experience, a course developed by a social studies teacher and an English teacher, and a human behavior course designed by science and social studies teachers. Furthermore, to support team teaching, the school schedule includes options for time blocks that include one-hour classes as well as classes that last close to three hours. The longer blocks permit teachers of team-taught classes, such as Immigrant Fiction or Science Research Methods, to plan trips and interviews that involve students in active learning and help them to learn about subject material in new ways. 2018-19 CEP 20  Another example of the way in which collaborative planning serves as both philosophy and structure is our use of project groups. At the beginning of each semester, staff develops the plans, curriculum, and organization of a three-week, school wide project. The project involves each student in learning experiences that grow from a central question, such as Do elections matter? What makes a good museum? How does architecture affect people's lives? What is the impact of T.V. on American society? Faculty members meet as a whole group to plan, develop areas for further study, gather materials, investigate research opportunities, and evaluate the progress of the project. Students then choose which topic they would like to work on during the project and plan their approach and the types of activities they will engage in, such as interviewing, researching, visiting sites in the city, and inviting speakers to the school. It is in this context of staff collaboration that the peer classroom visits will occur, and, given the pervasive culture of collaboration, be constructive in improving the education our students receive. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1, 2019, 85% of all teachers will have participated in two classroom visit/peer observations and small group problem-of-practice discussion on issues arising from those observations. By June, 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in four classroom visits/peer observations. This will result in both small group and school-wide targeted discussions on issues arising from the observations throughout the year, and ultimately provide all teachers with more examples and traction to experiment with ways to improve their own instruction. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Almost all teachers will observe at least two other classrooms during the first semester, paying special attention to students identified as struggling. Groups will form based upon issues arising from observations. Teachers, students with special challenges September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 All teachers will observe at least four other classrooms by the end of the year, paying special attention to students identified as struggling. Groups will form based upon issues arising from observations. Teachers, students with special challenges September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 These observations will include a specific focus on students mentioned in bullet two (actually, as a transfer school, it would be impossible to ignore those students, since they are the majority of our populations). Teachers, students with special challenges September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 Peer intervisitation coordinator (PIC) will monitor observations and propose problems-of-practice groups. Peer intervisitation coordinator (PIC) will monitor observations and propose problems-of-practice groups. Peer intervisitation coordinator (PIC) will monitor observations and propose problems-of-practice groups. These observations will inform communications with the parents of the students. Teachers, students with special challenges. September 5, 2018 – June 1, 2019 Teachers and parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tutorial teachers communicate frequently with parents to explain how the staff works together to help students succeed in classes and make progress towards graduation. Team teachers work together to communicate with parents. The project, our opening activity each semester, which is developed collaboratively by the staff, is explained to parents extensively. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our peer intervisitaton coordinator will receive release time and/or per session compensation in order to coordinate the intervisitation system , as well as to plan and run professional development sessions in connection with the issues noted during observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress at the mid-term of each semester as well as at the end of each semester. The mid-point in the Fall semester is November 16; the semester ends on January 30. For the Spring semester, the mid-point is the end of March/beginning of April (specific date to be chosen later) and the semester ends in June of 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We maintain an observations spread sheet that is filled in as observations are completed. In addition, the Peer Intervisitation Coordinator monitors the completion of observations and checks in with teachers to develop/modify study group questions. As the Urban Academy staff is a cohesive group of seasoned, veteran teachers, we assess our "progress" in classroom teaching as a staff, through a professional dialogue. We also take pride in the extraordinarily high percentage of students who respond positively to survey questions about their engagement and sense of challenge. We will continue to monitor student survey responses as evidence of the success of our teaching and observation model. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Urban Academy is a very small school --roughly 150 students -- and we have always prided ourselves on the amount of individual attention we give to every student. (We are able to do this in large part because we devote almost every dollar in our budget to classroom teachers, enabling us to keep class sizes down.) When considering students with special needs, the school mantra was that we provide every student with an individualized education program, and little time was spent discussing the particularized needs of students with actual IEPs. Under the current principal and co-director, the school has begun to look more closely at students with IEPs, and to bring in the expertise of those trained in special education. Three teachers already on the staff (20% of the staff) have worked to obtain special education certificates by enrolling in graduate level courses in the field. These personnel changes have enabled us to provide ICT classes and other special education services. A small committee from the staff identified roughly 25 students (some with IEPs, some without) who require more intensive attention than the general student body. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to provide services to 100% students with IEPs and to identify and provide support to those students without IEPs but whose academic struggles are too great to overcome them without targeted intervention. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We will enroll 5-10 students (numbers vary depending on admissions) in ICT classes. Students with ICT classes recommended on their IEPs. September 5, 2018, February, 2019 Tutorial teachers, Special Ed. liaisons, principal. Students without IEPs but who would benefit from will be provided tutoring Once students are registered, teachers of the 6 students requiring the most intensive assistance will convene in committees to structure the expectations and supports for those students for the semester. Once students are registered, committees of 3 teachers will meet to discuss needs of remaining 20 (or so ) students for the semester. Students identified by staff committee. September 5, 2018, February, 2019 Students indentified by staff committees. September 5, 2018, February, 2019 Tutorial teachers, classroom teachers of those students. Tutorial teachers, classroom teachers of those students. Parents will be informed of the special supports being provided for their children and asked for input and feedback. We are aiming for 80% compliance with these deadlines and 100% by the end of term. Students identified by staff committees. Tutorial teachers, classroom teachers, parents. On-going, but specifically at mid-terms and ends of term. Final reports will be provided in June 2019, by which point all plans should have been implemented. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 25  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal meets with parent leaders (on the PA and the SLT) on a regular basis to explain how the school is functioning as well as to solicit their suggestions for improvement. We regularly ask teachers to meet with the PA to explain different components of our program, as well as to help them understand the unique nature of a staff-run school that takes as its mission working with teenagers as full people. When parents come to us frustrated with their child, who they are unable to "make do their homework," we tell them that their job is to raise a teenager, and our job is to get them to do their homework. We are a small staff, and every teacher is expected to work with parents. Tutorial teachers are the point of access for parents in many cases, but the Co-Directors are always available to talk as well, and we do, several times a day, every day. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Almost all of our budget is spent on classroom teachers, allowing this sort of individualized attention to students. The extra funding supplied for students with IEPs will be spent on providing the required services. Considerable staff meeting time (1 hour each week for the first four weeks of the semester, roughly), will be allocated to student-committee meetings. Teacher schedules will be adjusted to provide services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At mid-terms (mid-November), we will assess to what extent the students in question are succeeding in classes and gaining the skills we are targeting. For those students with IEPs, we will will assess progress using SESIS, as well as our own forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-term comments and IEP progress charts will be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parents consistently say, both in formal Dep't of Ed surveys as well as in our own surveys, that the school staff and administration are the most responsive they have ever seen. Phone calls and emails are returned in a timely manner, and parents who wish to contact the school find it very easy to do so. The co-directors both spend hours each week on the phone with parents and replying to their email. However, Our parent involvement could be stronger.  This year, 48% of our parents responded to the annual school survey, which was the highest percentage ever, and yet could still be (a little) higher.  Parent teacher conferences are well attended in the Fall, not as well attended in the Spring. We would like to do better. One area where we had success last year that we would like to continue is the parent involvement in the college process. We held a series of meetings for parents of seniors in the fall covering topics like an overview of financial aid, help filling out FAFSA, and an overview of the application process. We had over 80% turnout at the evening meetings, and close to 90% participation by the time make up sessions were held. This made the entire process easier and more successful. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal for this year is to increase parent involvement, where appropriate. To the extent that research demonstrates that parent involvement can increase student achievement, more would be better. To that end, we aim to increase parent involvement this year in several areas and through several means. greater (at least a 2% point increase in) parent participation in the annual survey, greater attendance (by at least 2%) at parent teacher conferences    We would like to have 85% participation in the evening college meetings, and 95% after make up sessions. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will update our website to provide information in a more timely/on-going basis. Parents Over the summer Administration/technology coordinators We will increase communication via email. We will send emails and use follow up phone calls to ensure attendance at college meetings. Parents Parents of seniors September, October, 2018 Administration, parent coordinator and teachers. College bridge coach and CA4A team. The majority of our students are described by bullet 2. Parents. On going Teachers, administrator. This entire goal is about stronger parent involvement. Parents. Entire school community On going. We will reassess by June 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our community service program enlists more than 100 organizations to provide placement and supervision for our students. Many are in the local community; all are within the NYC community. We have a formal partnership with the Manhattan Theater Club, and informal partnerships with close to 150 city organizations where we place our students for community service and internships, from Mt. Sinai Hospital to Housing Works to GMHC. We are working with our CA4A coach, Denise Copeland, to streamline our college application process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The parent coordinator (and the funds provided for the PC salary) will be responsible for coordinating increased communication between the school and parents. As noted before, our budget is largely devoted to paying our teaching staff, our human resources. Teachers are available to communicate with parents, and since our classes are so small and our teachers know our students so well, their communications with parents are more meaningful and effective. 2018-19 CEP 28  We adjust the school schedule each semester to prioritize student centered learning. We do not hire per diem substitutes, since we believe that teachers who do not know students cannot really teach them effectively. Instead, we cover each others' classes when needed. We use teacher per session to pay for after school enrichment work, tech support (one of our teachers has a PhD in computer science), and teacher PD and planning time. We have never paid a dime in supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will look at parent attendance at parent-teacher conferences in November and April. We will also look at the parent participation in the annual survey. We should see at least a 2% increase in both (with the usual caveats about the validity of statistics when the sample space is as small as the student/parent population of Urban). We will look at senior parent attendance at the evening college meetings held in in the fall. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We take attendance at parent teacher conferences, and the results of participation in the annual survey are provided when the numbers are in, usually in May (but that depends on the Department of Education). Attendance at parent teacher conferences and survey data are, therefore, the instruments of measure being used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who failed to pass the ELA exam on the first try. Students who display difficulty reading in literature classes. Students who are unable achieve 80% on baseline test of basic math. Students who are unable to complete first lab report independently Students whose initial papers demonstrate weak skills in social studies, or who display difficulty in reading texts in social studies classes. Self-referrals or referral from SBST or parents or teachers. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Inquiry based discussions in class. Differentiated choice of readings, repeated readings, interactive writings. Audiobooks available for all students. Inquiry based group work in class Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one on one assistance, tutoring available. During the school day and after the school day. Small group, one on one assistance, tutoring available. During the school day and after the school day. Inquiry based group work in class Small group, one on one assistance, tutoring available. During the school day and both before after the school day. One on one assistance, tutoring available. During the school day and both before after the school day. Group and individual sessions. During the school day and after the school day. Inquiry based discussions in class. Differentiated choice of readings, repeated readings, interactive writings. Individual and group counseling provided by both school counselor and social worker at Mt. Sinai school-based health clinic. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Currently, to our knowledge, we have four STH students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  We have made funds available for basic clothing necessities, and our school counselor has referred them for community based services. Our co-directors are in frequent contact with their parents to ensure that the school is aware of their struggles and can assist them whenever possible. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received $4,704 in STH allocation. 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Urban Academy Laboratory High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Urban Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Urban Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP 38  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Urban Academy Laboratory High School Borough Manhattan School Number 565 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Adam Grumbach Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Daniel Frimpong Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Walzer Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal none Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent Xiomara Perez Parent Coordinator Rachel Santiago Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 We n/a Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 n/a Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions n/a Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program We Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 164 2018-19 CEP 43 Total number of ELLs 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We have a teacher-created baseline writing sample and reading assessment for all students who enter the school, which is compared to reading and writing assessments administered every year thereafter. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a teacher created diagnostic for reading and writing. We have also partnered with the Center for Perceptual Development to diagnose students who are struggling with language. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use teacher created assessments to measure progress. 2018-19 CEP 44  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students in academic need are identified by their classroom teachers, who meet in committees to develop "support plans" for struggling students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based student performance on the assessments, we use the 3 tier strategy for intervention outlined in the Rtl Guide. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELL students take the NYSELAT and the ELA Regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have weekly staff meetings a which information is provided. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to question here: Should one of the students we admit in February need to have the NYSESLAT administered, we will identify him/her. The principal administers the spoken portion of the test. The other sections are administered by Manhattan International High School and they collaborate with us to ensure that our students are able to take the test with their students. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to question here: n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to question here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We currently have no ELL students. If they enroll, they will be placed in classes in heterogeneous groups. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our in core areas are highly differentiated with an emphasis on reading, writing and speaking skills. This is a form of tier 1 intervention -- strong core content. For tier 2 and 3 students, we have more intensive interventions through smaller group sessions and indvidual tutoring. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have many bilingual teachers on staff who are capable of administering assessments in many languages. Should an ELL student who speaks a language not spoken by one of our teachers enroll, we will use the Dept of Ed. translation and 2018-19 CEP 45  interpretation services or seek the assistance of another teacher in the building (there are 3 other high schools, including an International school) 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students are prepared for the PBATs in their classes, through scaffolded and differentiated lessons. The model is a discussion based classroom that emphasizes the development of spoken and written language proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The PBATs developed by the New York State Performance Standards Consortium include assessment through rubrics that make explicit use of language skills, and allow for variation between individual students, guaranteeing that all student achieve a minimum level of competency. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For all students, services are provided according to need, as determined by classroom teachers in coordination with tutorial teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. n/ a Paste response to questions here: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? n/ a Paste response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We currently have no ELLs. All students are assessed with a diagnostic test to determine ability. Students are placed into small classes according to ability, and are provided multiple external supports including tutoring, one-on-one attention from teachers and homework lab hours each week. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. n/a 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are seeking to have additional staff members certified as TESOL. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? n/a 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. See 10, above. 2018-19 CEP 46  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are seeking to have additional staff members certified as TESOL. In the past, when we have had ELL students needing services, we have managed to get them through teachers from other schools in the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have multiple computer labs with access to on-line materials. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All of our courses are chosen by students. All ELA classes are thus eligible to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We currently have no ELLs. We use the support provided by our Affinity Support Field Office to ensure compliance with State and Federal mandates. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All tutorial teachers monitor the transition of all new students, including ELLs (in the event that we have any), and are the point of contact for their parents. For parents who do not speak English, the tutorial teacher will seek the assistance of a teacher who speaks the home language or interpretation services if such a teacher does not exist in the school. Currently, ASL is available to all students in the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. n/a The Consortium provides many PD opportunities for ELL teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? n/a 2018-19 CEP 47 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. n/a Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 CEP 48 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Adam Grumbach, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: n/a School DBN: n/a Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Adam Grumbach Title Principal Assistant Principal Rachel Santiago Parent Coordinator Daniel Frimpong ENL/Bilingual Teacher Xiomara Perez Parent Rebecca Walzer Teacher/Subject Area 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Kathy Rehfield-Pelles 1/1/01 Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 50  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M565 School Name: Urban Academy Laboratory High School Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Daniel Frimpong Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Urban Academy reviews the Home Language Report (RHLA) of every new entrant to determine families’ language needs. We also rely on teacher reports of students with parents requiring translation services. Using both sources, we keep a continually updated list of families who need translated school documents and translation services at Parent-Teacher Conferences or other school events. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 51 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language While many families indicated that a language other than English is spoken at home, with the following exceptions, all other families indicated that they are proficient in English and prefer that to be their primary language for written and oral communication. The exceptions: 1 family has 1 parent who communicates orally using American Sign Language. 4 families require communication in Spanish In addition, we have the following languages spoken in homes that have requested communication in English: A chinese dialect German Mandinka Arabic Serbo-Croation Wolof 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 52  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families We send out the school year calendar in the first week in September. See previous column. We send out a notice about curriculum night in the second week in September. We make the course catalogue available at the beginning of October and again at the beginning of March. We send a reminder about Parent Teacher Conferences at the beginning of November. We send a newsletter from the school leaders out at the beginning of November, Mid January, Mid March and the beginning of June. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use native speakers on our staff (or in the JREC building) to translate. We use Google translation or the DoE's translation services if there is no native speaker on our staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school We have currciculum night at the start of each semester, and parent-teacher conferences in the middle of each semester. See previous column. The college advisors hold a parents night in October and again in December (the second to discuss the financial aid process). Whenever students demonstrate a pattern of lateness or absence, the academic advisor for the student calls the parent. When the patterns become severe, the principal calls home and sets up a meeting with the advisor and parents. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have used the DoE translation services for phone conferences. We have used interpreters from the American Sign Language 2018-19 CEP 53  institute. We have native speakers on staff who will interpret when needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Native speakers on staff are assigned families that require interpreters. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The regs are reviewed each year during a staff meeting. Resources are reviewed at the same time, including the DoE Tranlsation and Interpretation unit, as well as the outside agencies that provide services. Any family that requires communication in a language other than English is identified and assigned either native speaker on staff or an alternate resources, with a staff point person assigned. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We mail home the Parents Bill of Rights and post the Welcome poster in visible locations around the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will scrutinize the annual survey provided by the Department of Education. In addition, we will formally solicit feedback from parents who have requested translation/interpretation. 2018-19 CEP 54 
