2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M570 School Name: SATELLITE ACADEMY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: STEVEN ZBAIDA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Satellite Academy 301200011570 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M570 120 West 30 th Street, New York, NY 10001 646-674-2800 Fax: 646-674-2829 School Contact Person: Email Address: Paul Melkonian PMelkon@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Paul Melkonian TyraPatterson DhaianaValdez NA WendolynOrtiz EvanaCruz NA District Information Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet NY, NY 10002 Paul Rotondo PRotond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 646-654-1261 FSC: Manhattan Fax: 646-654-1742 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: YuetChu 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Ave. NY, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Steven Zbaida Tyra Patterson Dhaiana Valdez William Moon Kiarah Cannon Khaylan Delahoz NA Ashley Linsalato Idalis Duprey *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teresa Arroyo Wendolyn Ortiz Edwin Santiago Kairy Vasquez Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity f or stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlin ed in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Satellite Academy is dedicated to providing students who have opted out of larger, traditional high schools an opportunity to complete their education in a smaller, student-centered learning community. Our mission has always been to help students overcome their negative feelings about school, improve their attendance, become a ctive learners and graduate with full capability for future success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special i nitiatives being implemented. Our objective is to help our students grow academically and emotionally by teaching them to develop successful strategies for meeting all challenges. We know that students thrive when they are engaged in rigorous curricula. We believe that people learn best by making connections between what they already know and what they are learning. Using their new skills and knowledge in interdisciplinary and project-based courses, students authentically demonstrate their intellectual growth. We expect our students to be active student-citizens of Satellite Academy’s learning community. We believe that school should be a safe environment that practices the skill of conflict resolution. We provide accessible social work and counseling opportunities for all students. Students, parents and guardians find that Satellite Academy is a school where growth and effort lead to success. Satellite Academy is a high school with 266 students from 9 through grade 12. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a transfer high school, the students at Satellite Academy are “over-aged and under-credited.” Most students come to our school have many personal and academic difficulties. We teach, but also rehabilitate young people who would otherwise drop out of school entirely. Therefore we work with a student population that is more challenging than student populations in traditional four year, articulated high schools. Because our students have generally come to us from schools where they felt that they were not given individual and caring attention, all students are in advisory classes, (family groups), which provide academic and personal support. The student body includes 3% English language learners and 16% special education students. These students need strategies to support their accessing higher level texts and higher order thinking skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We progressed in two areas this academic school year, which were Collaborative Teaching and Rigorous Instruction. Teachers participated in lesson studies and inter-visitation cycles to further develop their rigorous instructional strategies. Teachers also participated in weekly PD sessions that focused on topics including literacy strategies. Teachers also participated in teaching learning communities where they received peer feedback on teacher created assignments through the lens of student work. We will continue this work in the coming school year. In addition, we will continue to specifically focus on increasing student attendance. We will have a team working on attendance, including a full-time attendance teacher. We will shared best practices for attendance during staff meetings and periodically check our attendance data as a staff. This expansion of staff members focusing on attendance will increase our ability to target attendance across the school and i n all classes. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M570 School Conf iguration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 298 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Ty pes and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 101 50 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 73.8% % Reduced Lunch 4.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 57.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.6 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Perf ormance f or Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Perf ormance f or High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 56% 13% 13.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Ov erall NY SED Accountability Status (2018-19) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School No Y es Y es No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Island er Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in Mathematics (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in ELA (2016-17) N/A Y SH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Y early Progress (AY P) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A 31 17 56.7% 0.0% 21.5% 38.3% 0.3% 1.0% 2 0% 7.4 N/A N/A 37% 6% 51.0% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A Y SH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Examining survey data from teacher experience with preparing students for summative assessments, teachers determined that an area of need continues to be to further develop students' literacy skills across all subject areas. 100% of teachers responded that student literacy skills need to be enhanced to facilitate student ability to complete assessment tasks at all levels more independently. Based on our diagnostic data, we determined that literacy skills were below grade level for over 95% of our student body. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. This academic year, Departmental Inquiry Teams will focus on the implementation of aligned literacy speaking and listening strategies. Every lesson should have some opportunity for speaking and listening. Collaborative activities (group work) should be structured in a way that has each student speaking. Teachers will explicitly teach “active listening” skills and create many opportunities for students to practice this. Professional Development will focus on literacy skills and alignment across subject areas. We will continue to develop our teacher professional learning community by ensuring teachers have numerous opportunities to participate in peer feedback cycles and consultancy protocols on student/ instructional issues. Students will demonstrate improved literacy skills by June 2019 as determined by progress on literacy skills rubrics we develop, which align with New York Standards Consortium rubrics. We also anticipate seeing higher quality PBA presentations and increased literacy levels as measured by class performance assessments. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff developer and teachers will share and explore speaking and listening strategies to implement in classes. After implementing a teaching strategy, teachers will examine the impact of the strategy through protocols and make adjustments accordingly. Staff will participate in professional learning communities by sharing peer feedback on student work and instructional materials, participating in inter-visitation cycles, and by sharing best practices. Departmental teams will focus specific inquiry meetings solely to examine English language learners and students with disabilities. Through these meetings, teachers will identify strategies to implement and discuss student progress and any necessary instructional shifts to be made. Teachers will become more integrated into our work to support our student attendance by looking at attendance data and sharing best practices. Teachers and Students Oct. 2019-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, staff developer Teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Administrators, teachers, staff developer Teachers and students Nov. 2018-Jan. 2019/ Administrators, teachers, staff developer Mar. 2019-May 2019 Teachers and students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our assistant principal and parent coordinator will hold workshops to assist parents on monitoring and supporting the academic progress and college readiness of their students. Parents/ Guardians will receive training and have full access to ESD, our new in-house student information system, so that they can access live updates about their students' attendance and progress towards meeting formative assessment benchmarks. This will take place both during the Fall of 2018 and Spring of 2019. The assistant principal and parent coordinator, along with our administrative team, will implement and oversee this work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 13  We hired a two-day per week F-Status curriculum specialist to lead our literacy professional development. We've allocated $5000 for teachers to attend professional development conferences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess our progress during a staff meeting in February 2019. We expect that we see more students who are able to complete reading and writing tasks independently and competently. We will use inquiry cycles to monitor the success of a given strategy. Inquiry cycles will begin in Nov. 2018 and each cycle will run for approximately six weeks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim assessment exercises and targeted assessments will be used to determine progress. At the end of each semester, Performance Based Assessment tasks will be used to determine progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a transfer high school, the students at Satellite Academy are “over-aged and under-credited.” Most students who come to our school have many personal and academic difficulties. We teach, but also rehabilitate young people who would otherwise drop out of school entirely. Therefore we work with a student population that is more challenging than student populations in traditional four year, articulated high schools. This is part of our mission. As part of our mission, we aim to develop our students' ability to advocate for themselves and feel empowered to enact their vision. This empowerment, we believe, will support student investment in their education and their desire to maintain a positive learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 academic year, SAHS will increase student voice through the implementation of a student leadership group that will gather student input and provide a platform where students can advocate and communicate their needs. This will help our school environment better represent our students' needs. We hope to see a 20% increase in student participation in school-wide initiatives. In addition, a circle model of discussion will be implemented in Family Group classes, in order to provide students more opportunity to connect, lead and advocate. We anticipate 100% of Family Groups facilitating the circle model o f discussion at least once a week. This strategy, which is derived from the Restorative Justice framework, has proven to support the development of a connected/ invested student culture. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will facilitate the connection of family group members to support a positive school culture. This will be done by developing our circle method of discussion in Family Group. Students Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Advisors (teachers) The school will facilitate professional development to help teachers both develop and implement the circle method of discussion. Teachers Fall 2018-Spring 2019 Administrators, staff developer The school will facilitate community building and conflict resolution by taking students on a day trip to Boces and having outside consultants from Ramapo run conflict resolution workshops. Students October 2018 and Nov. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, Ramapo Consultants, BOSES consultants Our social workers will conduct a student leadership group called Change Makers. Students Fall 2018 Administrators, social workers and Spring 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will hold on-going workshops to assist parents on monitoring and supporting student success. This will take place in the Fall of 2018 and Spring of 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We hired Ramapo consultants to run conflict resolution workshops- a cost of $15,000. We paid $16,000 to take our students on a day trip focued on community building at BOCES. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the midpoint of the school year, February, our goal will be to have 15 or fewer combined superintendent and principal suspensions on OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By May 2019, we anticipate having 23 or fewer combined superintendent and principal suspensions on OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our end of the year reflection surveys, 100% of teachers reported that they see student behavior as an impediment to their ability to develop academic skills. In order to address this, we will focus on Habits of Work skills that student need in order to be successful in their academic endeavors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. SAHS will increase opportunities for teachers to collaborate and build upon common practices and structures that focus on student work habits that reflect college and career readiness. By the end of the academic year, we anticipate an improvement in student performance for work habits we identify and assess via rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will continue to support a schedule that allows for teacher collaboration and intervisitation. Teachers The school will create a per-session committee, open to all teachers, to develop and plan the implementation of lessons that will help develop student work and study habits. This group will also create the rubric to assess student work habit development. Teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrators, staff developer Administrators, teachers, staff developer The school will run professional development for all teachers to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and overage/under-credited students, with a focus on habits of work. Teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Administrators, teachers, staff developer School will facilitate more teacher to teacher discussions on pedagogy to support the further development of our teacher learning community. Teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Administrators, teachers, staff developer 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/ Guardians will receive training and have full access to ESD, our in-house student information system, so that they can access live updates about their students' attendance and progress towards meeting formative assessment benchmarks. This will take place in the Fall of 2018 and the Spring of 2019 and will be facilitated by our administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We hired a two-day per week F-Status curriculum specialist to lead our professional development. We hired a new Parent Coordinator to support parent engagement in all areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the midpoint of the school year, February, our goal will be that 100% of our teachers will implement at least one habit of work strategy and debrief the impact of the implement strategy. We will also assess the impact of the habits of work strategies on our students with disabilities, English language learners, and overage/under-credited students through observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will give feedback and reflect on their experience via a teacher survey at the midpoint and the end of the school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social -emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey , etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through staff surveys, we determined that teachers expressed a need for further support in the teaching of literacy and in running effective advisory classes. 100% of teachers reported they would benefit from support and professional development in these areas. We have a highly-effective staff that continues to strive to better support both the learning and the social-emotional needs/growth of our students. Through this information, we determined that we needed to further support and nurture the professional growth of our teaching staff. We've allocated time for professional development two times a weeks and hired a staff developer to work with teacher, both individually and as a group during our allotted professional development meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To conduct Initial Planning Meetings with 100% of our teachers in a timely manner and elicit the goals of each of our teachers in order to help support these goals through professional development. There will be an increase of teacher led initiatives that will occur through inquiry teams, teacher mentoring and teacher led PD to continue to build a community of shared leadership as requested on in -school teacher surveys. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will meet with administrators to determine goals for the year. Teachers Oct. 2018 Administration To conduct regular teacher consultancy protocols, so that teachers can support each others' pedagogy. Teachers Offer more opportunities for teachers to take on roles that put them in leadership positions. Teachers Create teacher pairs to establish a mentor for each teacher who is new to Satellite. Teachers new to Satellite Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Staff developer Administration Administration, staff developer 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our newly hired Parent Coordinator will keep parents updated about school activities and initiatives. This will take place in the Fall of 2018 and the Spring of 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We hired a two-day per week F-Status curriculum specialist to lead our professional development. We hired a new Parent Coordinator to support parent engagement in all areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each semester, we will conduct surveys of teachers to determine the success of our implemented strategies. We anticipate that teachers will report that they feel their voices are heard and that they are being supported in the areas they identified as needing more support and professional development. We also anticipate the majority will report they they met or are in process of meeting their stated goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year we hired a new Parent Coordinator to work on parent involvement and with families and to be creative in re-engaging our parents. Our Parent Coordinator will continue to develop activities and strategies to engage our parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school will set up multiple opportunities in the semester for staff to communicate with parents verbally or in writing/online. Parents will be invited to participate in PBAT presentations, college/career workshops, and student celebrations throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To continue a service learning class and service learning activities throughout our school community. Students To hold parent meetings and workshops to engage parents in various topics related to their students' success, including college workshops, financial aid workshops and open houses. Parents To create regular opportunities for advisors to reach out to parents. Parents Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Administration, teachers Administration, Parent Coordinator Administration, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We hired a new Parent Coordinator to support parent engagement in all areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will determine our progress by administering parent surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 25  Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustme nts to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Scores on Diagnostic tests and interim assessments. Scores on Diagnostic tests and interim assessments. Scores on Diagnostic tests and interim assessments. Scores on Diagnostic tests and interim assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Scores on Diagnostic tests and interim assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-to-one Tutoring Small group One-to-one Tutoring Small group One-to-one Tutoring Small group One-to-one Tutoring Small group Before and after-school and by appointment Before and after-school and by appointment Before and after-school and by appointment Before and after-school and by appointment One-to-one, small group During school and after school ● Support for the completion of class work and projects ● Block Scheduling ● Support for the completion of class work and projects ● Block Scheduling ● Support for the completion of class work and projects ● Block Scheduling ● Support for the completion of class work and projects ● Block Scheduling We have two Social Workers.We also collaborate with counseling institutions that provide additional resources. Outreach is done for services that may not be available within the school- Project Stay and The Door. Counseling is 2018-19 CEP 27  available before, during and after school. The social worker keeps daily meeting schedules that include referred students in crisis and ‘regularly’ scheduled students and groups. We focus on STD awareness and wellness through health fairs.We also have various groups that support our teen parents, gay-lesbian students, and students with varying family issues. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set -aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Along with in-school activities and trips, we provide our STH students with clothing, food, school supplies and personal hygiene items. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff at Satellite Academy High School are highly qualified and fully licensed. Satellite Academy High School has a very high and consistent teacher retention rate. Teachers seek to work at Satellite and to remain at Satellite because of the academically rigorous and supportive environment we offer students. Satellite Academy High School implements a true model of shared decision making. Staff members at the school are full members of the decision making process and, therefore, value their opportunity to be a part of our community. Our school’s Learning Environment Survey clearly demonstrates the positive culture that exists within our school and the high degree of student, parent, and teacher buy-in. We hired a staff developer to implement professional development and to support teachers and therefore teacher retention. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At Satellite Academy, we employ a staff developer who works closely with our administration to facilitate high quality professional development for our teachers and staff that will support our students’ capacity to meet the Common Core Standards. In addition, we seek support from the Department of Education and other sources to support our professional development goals. We hold two professional development meetings per week and our over-arching focus, as determined by teacher survey, is on literacy skill and advisory groups. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 31  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a member of the New York Performance Standards Consortium, the vision of instruction at Satellite Academy is driven by performance assessments. We utilize the Consortium summative, PBA rubric for our exit assessment. Teams of teachers meet routinely to evaluate and adjust the school’s interim assessments, which are guided by the Consortium's PBA rubric. The staff developer and administration provide professional development regarding the use of assessment results to drive classroom instruction during our regular inquiry meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes 1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated 2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 32  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local TBD 2018-2019 0 0 0 TBD2018-2019 X X 5B 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it i s consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated School wide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds . Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high -2018-19 CEP 33  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s pol icy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Satellite Academy High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision -making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Satellite Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School -Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 36  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent -Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communicati on between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Satellite Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 37  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school -parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to Decembe r 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 39  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based o n the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay i nformed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my chil d; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes i nvolving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Satellite Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 570 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Steve Zbaida Assistant Principal Paul Melkonian Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maryam Dilakian Passley Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Coach NA School Counselor Jacqueline Caballos Parent NA Parent Coordinator Michelle Kusi Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Paul Rotondo Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this s ection. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 266 2018-19 CEP 42 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is conside red a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total K 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes Performance-Based Assessments. Students only need to take and pass the English Language Arts Regents to graduate. In literacy, our school administers a diagnostic upon admission and interim assessments that are aligned to the consortium rubric and to Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams examine student interim assessments to inform instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 43  We evaluate success depending on the number of credits that students receive towards graduation each year as well as the graduation rate. We also examine performance on the NYSESLAT and interim assessments. We always strive for all students to graduate on time and, thus, we put structures in place for them to succeed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K -5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our students who are ELLs are in grade 9. The majority have reached an Intermediate or Advance profiency level on the most recent assessment. Two of our students are at the Emerging level. None of our ELL students have IEPs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all stud ents regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have two ESL teacher delivering instruction to our ELL students. We also have a social stu dies teacher who is currently in the process of getting dual licensed. This teacher will provide supplementary services. Our ELL student receive services in class and also through pull -out services. Currently all Satellite teachers have received training to support ELL students within their classrooms. Our ELL students are hetergenously mixed. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have two ESL teacher delivering instruction to our ELL students. We also have a social studies teacher who is currently in the process of getting dual licensed. This teacher will provide supplementary services. Our ELL student receive services in c lass and also through pull -out services. Currently all Satellite teachers have received training to support ELL students within their classrooms. Our ELL students are hetergenously mixed 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches an d methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 44  Our ESL teachers deliver core content and support of ELL students. All of our teachers are training in ELL instructional approaches and methods to support our ELL students across all disciplines. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ESL teachers evalutate our ELL students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our teachers utilize the Universal Design method to address the learning needs of all of our students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use a variety of grade-level materials and supplementary materials to help support the learning needs of our ELLs and SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our students are scheduled into blocks periods. They are support through our methodoligies that give them access to different learning modalities. Our school utilizes Performance-Based Assessments. Students only need to take and pass the English Language Arts Regents to graduate. In literacy, our school administers a diagnostic upon admission and interim assessments that are aligned to the consortium rubric and to Common Core Learning Stand ards. Teacher teams examine student interim assessments to inform instruction. Students are intergrated into heterogenous classes. Our Performance-Based Assessment model allows for Universal Design methods of instruction and assessment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We use an after school tutoring as an intervention. We also provide opportunities for credit recovery as we are a transfer hi gh school to support our ELLs. The language spoken is English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One of our teachers is currently getting certified in ESL. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs i n your building. Our ELLs are provided equal access to all programs that are instructional and extra -curriculuar. We have after-school tutoring that our ELLs attend with our other students who are not English Language Learners. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use computer technology with instruction. Technology includes word processing, and Internet for research. 2018-19 CEP 45  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Many of our teachers speak students' home language. Students have access to classroom libraries and dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Staff meet with our ELLs and their parents to plan a path that leads towards graduation. They decide together on the most effective strategies. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of th e ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use computer technology with instruction. Technology includes word processing, and Internet for research. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Staff members meet with our ELLs and their parents before the school year begins to plan the courses that they will take and the support options available. Other support includes academic tutoring which is performed after school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Orientation English, English Language Arts, Future of You, NYC Literature and Film, Satellite Magazine, Mi ndfulness, Spoken Word Poetry, Protest Literature, Graphic Novels, and Songwriting. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non -pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide training for teachers on implementation of ESL methodologies into all subject area clas ses. Currently all Satellite teachers have received training to support ELL students within their classrooms. We offer a comprehensive staff development program at Satellite Academy to address the pedagogical needs of our teachers. The professional development is for all teachers. We offer 5 PD sessions to address literacy strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have no guidance counselor, instead all advisors are trained in ELL methodologies and support our ELL students with their transition. We also have a social worker who is biligual. Our staff development addresses the pedagogical needs of teachers. We pr ovide support for our teachers in understanding the needs of second language learners as they progress in language and literacy acquisition. 2018-19 CEP 46  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to dis cuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mand ated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Satellite Academy plans and implements activities for students and parents in a variety of ways, including using a CBO. We have a Parent Association where parents are invited and attend monthly meetings. Notices are sent in English and in Spanish. We have translators at the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of E LLs. Involvement is varied and uneven. We continue to work to develop this area. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program fo r ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 47 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Steven Zbaida, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous schoo l to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual -ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Satellte Academy School DBN: 02M570 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Par t A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Steve Zbaida Title Principal Paul Melkonian Assistant Principal Michelle Kusi Parent Coordinator Maryam Dilakian Passley ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA NA NA NA NA Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jacqueline Caballo School Counselor Paul Rotondo Yuet Chu NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/26/16 10/26/16 10/26/16 10/26/16 NA NA NA NA NA 10/26/16 10/26/16 10/26/16 NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 49  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M570 School Name: Satellite Academy Superintendent: LaShawn Robinso The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education ( Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation a nd interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We send out Home Language Identification Surveys, we check ATS reports, and we have students fill out Student Emergency Contact cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written: Spanish, Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 50  Spoken: Spanish, Report: As we do not have grades, this data is organized by class. Worlds Literature and Culture: Spanish History in Film: Spanish Biology Investigations: Spanish Orientation English: Spanish Orientation Math: Spanish Orientation Social Studies: Spanish Orientation Science: Spanish Support Class: Spanish WWII and the Holocaust: Spanish Voices of America: Spanish Currents: Spanish Science News and Research: Spanish Modeling with Algebra 2: Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, rough ly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We send out parent-teacher conference announcements and progress reports. We also give a general overview of our curricula and path to graduation to parents. Open School: 9/30, 11/19, 3/9, 3/10, 5/30 Orientation Mandatory Parent Meeting: 9/18, 9/21 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meet ings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide We hold an Open School Night, an Orientation meeting, and we hold Parent- Teacher Conferences. interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will continue to use Welcome Posters, the Parents' Bill of Rights, the Parents' Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide at the security desk and the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services ? We will monitor our mechanisms via parent surveys. 2018-19 CEP 53 
