2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M580 School Name: RICHARD R. GREEN HIGH SCHOOL OF TEACHING Principal: JOAN WEAVER 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information RICHARD R. GREEN HS of TEACHING 02M580 School Number (DBN): 310200011580 9-12 7 BEAVER STREET, NEW YORK, NY 10004 646 826 8174 Phone Number: 646 826 8175 Fax: JOAN WEAVER JWEAVER@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: JOAN WEAVER PETER COCHEO Evette Dejesus Ms. Weaver EvetteDejesus Giovanni Moreira, Margaret Queener CBO Representative: Not applicable Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 SEVENTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10001 MBradbu@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 356 7563 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212 356 7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue 8 TH Floor, New York, NY 10001 YCHU@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 646 470 0721 Phone Number: 917 339 1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joan Weaver Peter Cocheo Evette Dejesus Lisa Morales EvetteDejesus Giovanni Moreira Margaret Queener *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Crystal Stewart Cynthia Queener Evette Dejesus Rachel Richards Nicole Bonanno Bill Malin Evdoxia Darios YaniferzCantor Member/ PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/TEACHER Member/ teacher Member/Teacher Member/ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL Member/ PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Richard R. Green High School of Teaching (RRG) we model respect, curiosity and commitment to education while creating a caring, active and collaborative learning environment designed to empower future citizens. We aspire to develop a responsible, respectful community that maintains a desire to learn, understand and appreciate the diversity of the world around them. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Richard R. Green High School of Teaching is a small school with 432 students located in Lower Manhattan in an historic building - the Standard Oil building constructed by Rockefeller in 1921. Our school is open to all students, general education students, special education students and English language learners (ELLs) - all are included in all programs. Many teachers are being coached to more effectively support students with Individualized Education Programs (IEPs). A second ENL teacher joined us in September 2016 due to increasing enrollment of ELLs - the schools serves students with a variety of first languages that include Spanish, French, Arabic, Bengali, and Mandarin. We recruit and work with students who aspire to work in education. In the 11th grade students may select a teaching internship - we have developed relationships with six neighborhood elementary and middle schools, and some students intern in our school. The school has been selected as a Showcase School for creating an inclusive community for LGBTQ students. For students who do not want to become educators, there are many other internships in the corporate world or with technology start-ups, some of which are detailed below. Our location in Lower Manhattan has several advantages: Safety - as we are within the Financial District our students are very safe. This is the safest part of New York City. Transportation - almost all subways lines converge here. The Staten Island ferry is close. We are accessible from all 5 boroughs Historical and Cultural Richness - teachers take students to sites of interest is our neighborhood such as The Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, The African Burial Ground, The Hunger Memorial, Fraunces Tavern, Wall Street, and The Museum of the American Indian Internship Opportunities - Students in the Teaching Academy intern in pre-K-12th grade classrooms while students in the Humanities Academy have a wide range or corporate and technology internships 2018-19 CEP 10  Corporate Partnerships - EY America provides resources for our College Mentoring for Access and Persistence (MAP) program, ScriptEd provides volunteers to teach programming and students have received paying internships with technology businesses, Cultural and Community Partnerships - New York Cares provides service learning opportunities such as re-stocking oyster beds off Governor's Island, Sponsorship for Educational Opportunity (SEO) scholars sponsors eight years of mentoring/tutoring (4 in school and 4 in college) plus access to competitive scholarships worth millions, The Future Project (TFP) gifts the school a Dream Director to work with leadership, students, teachers and parents in transforming the school into a vibrant and inclusive environment University Partnerships These partnerships provide students with access to college courses and include Hunter College College Now Program, Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) Science and Technology Program (STEP), Saturday Live at Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT), High School Law Institute at New York University (NYU), and Fordham University and Technology Entry Program Great care was taken when this office building was re-designed as a school in 2009 with an emphasis on blending old with new, creating splashes of color with bright tiles on the supporting pillars, preserving the huge original windows and creating a sense of space, light and height. The Lobby is a large and airy space and makes an attractive entrance to our school with a wide and open staircase that takes students up to the first floor. The Cafeteria and Library are double height. Classrooms are all equipped with Smartboards that teachers infuse into their pedagogy. The Gym and Fitness Room are competition standard and are well-equipped. Hallways are wide and lined with lockers. Security cameras enhance the sense of safety. This is a barrier-free school and is not a scanning school. The Gym and Fitness Room are shared with a middle school also housed in the building, otherwise this is a stand-alone school. The school has a strong college-going culture. This has been achieved with a number of successful college readiness partnerships, including: College for Every Student (CFES), College MAP (Mentoring, Access and Persistence) , Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID), College Action Research and Action (CARA), SEO (Sponsors for Educational Opportunity) Scholars, and College Now. The senior advisory teachers and guidance counselors guide students and their parents through the college application process. StoryCorpsU has trained teachers to help students develop personal narratives. Early college awareness is fostered by college campus visits from the 9th grade. We have developed links with several CUNY, SUNY and private colleges that give presentations in school and assist with scholarship acquisition. CFES students visit colleges upstate. The guidance counselors are planning a college fair and a teacher designs the annual Career Day in the spring. From September 2016, the student cohort 9-12 will be divided alphabetically with one guidance counselor working with half the student body 9-12 and the other working with the other half. This will establish a four-year student/family/guidance counselor relationship; counselors are working together to design 9-12 college preparedness. Parents report that teachers and leadership are very responsive with same day answers to emails and phone calls. "Even when we walk in without an appointment, someone is able to see us. There is easy communication with faculty members and the principal." Many parents use Pupil Path for two-way communication. The school is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools: 2018-19 CEP 11  Teacher Grade Teams - teachers were trained in facilitation and peer leadership. teams look at student work, curriculum, pedagogy, and social-emotional aspects. This engenders Strong Family-Community Ties Cohesive Vision - four school-wide documents were generated in collaboration that make transparent the desired practices - these are The School-wide Instructional Focus, the School-wide Grading Policy, School-wide Values and Guidelines for the Experiential Student-Centered Classroom. This clarity and focus are evidence of Effective School Leadership and the shared goals creates Trust. Teacher-to-Teacher Professional Learning - teachers design and facilitate workshops for peers, visit peers classrooms and provide feedback, co-plan and co-teach, and look at student and teacher work with a protocol. This creates Collaborative Teachers Teachers have been trained to set up a peer mediation program and restorative justice circles (this work is in its infancy). One teacher teaches an elective based on the ADL peer leadership and anti-bullying program. These initiatives create a Supportive Environment Coaches and Consultants - coaches and consultants have been brought in to work alongside of teachers. This is having a positive impact on student writing, student discourse, student-to-student collaboration, teacher co-planning and co-teaching, and independent reading. This encourages Rigorous Instruction. Three teachers and two deans have been trained in Conflict Mediation. The Return from Suspension protocol has been revised so the conference is facilitated by the guidance counselor, supported by the principal when necessary. Suspension center information is shared with the grade team and the counselor checks in daily with the returning student until it is felt the return has been successful. College for Every Student has a large number of trained peer mentors and a thriving peer mentoring program. 02M580 School Information Sheet School Configuration (2014-15) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment 505 SIG Recipient N/A Types and Number of English Language Learner Classes (2014-15) # Transitional Bilingual N/A # Dual Language N/A # Self-Contained English as a Second Language N/A # Special Classes 0 # SETSS 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching 43 Types and Number of Special Education Classes (2014-15) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language 9 14 Types and Number of Special Classes (2014-15) # Drama # Music # Dance 1 N/A # CTE N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12 School Composition (2013-14)  % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White 78.1% 78.8% 5.6% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2013-14) 0.7% 57.5% 2.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2014-15) 81.9% 5.7% 26.5% 35.8% 3.9% 0.2% Years Principal Assigned to School (2014-15) # of Deans (2014-15) 1.89 2 2 # of Assistant Principals (2014-15) # of Counselors/Social Workers (2014-15) 2 Personnel (2013-14) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate (2013-14) % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience (2013-14) N/A % Teaching Out of Certification (2013-14) 3.4% 0.1% Average Teacher Absences (2013-14) 6.95 Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2013-14) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) N/A Student Performance for High Schools (2012-13) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.0% Credit Accumulation High Schools Only (2013-14) % of 1st year students who earned 10+ credits 63.7% % of 3rd year students who earned 10+ credits 6 Year Graduation Rate 60.0% 76.8% % of 2nd year students who earned 10+ credits 4 Year Graduation Rate 52.5% 71.0% Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2014-15) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School X Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District X Accountability Status – Elementary and Middle Schools Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A N/A Multi-Racial N/A Limited English Proficient N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White N/A N/A Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A N/A Multi-Racial 2018-19 CEP 13  Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A Limited English Proficient N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A N/A Multi-Racial N/A Limited English Proficient N/A N/A Accountability Status – High Schools Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A Multi-Racial N/A N/A Limited English Proficient N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A N/A Multi-Racial N/A Limited English Proficient N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation Rate (2012-13) American Indian or Alaska Native N/A Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander N/A N/A N/A Multi-Racial YES Limited English Proficient N/A YES 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Five percent of the student body is English Language Learners and their language development is supported by one English as a new language (ENL) teacher who push into classes and have stand alone ENL classes. Sixteen percent of the student body are students with Individualized Education Programs (IEPs). Special educators are embedded within grade teams to help their peers support all types of learners. Increasingly teachers are bringing Universal Design for Learning (UDL) into their co-planning and co-teaching. Our building is barrier-free. We accommodate what ever program the IEP requires. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 14  Last year, the school was most successful with the element Collaborative Teachers. When the principal and AP Instruction met with each grade team in September to ask them what our greatest success had been, teachers spoke about relevant professional learning, their increasing mastery of student-centered classrooms and student-to-student discourse and the efficacy of teacher-facilitated grade team meetings. While we have made considerable progress in Supportive Environment. the Assistant Principal Organization, eight teachers and a dean have been trained in Restorative Justice Circles; they have turn-key trained all teachers. Circles are evident in some discipline classrooms. One key are of focus this year will be to reduce the number of incidents and suspensions recorded in the On-line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 CEP 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M580 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 499 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 4 8 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 79.0% % Reduced Lunch 4.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 60.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.15 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 50% 62.1% 3.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES YES No N/A 142 139 91.7% 4.4% 18.2% 25.1% 7.2% 4.8% 2 23% 6.9 N/A N/A 70% 63% 75.0% 27% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3.2 The school leader has put in place a number of initiatives to improve rigor and coherent curriculum such as: ● Grade Team and Department meetings that look at teacher work-in-development and student work with a protocol ● Instructional Rounds with parents, students and teachers that look at rigor, task, and student to student collaboration ● Purposeful hiring of new teachers ● Coaching has been provided to all Global Studies in visual teaching strategies, to selected ICT partnerships in ICT planning and facilitating, and to self-selected teachers in the writing process ● Regular PD on Mondays and Tuesdays and Chancellor’s Conference Days and after-school ● Advance feedback that is specific and addresses issues like task predicts performance and selecting a small number of power standards that are infused throughout the unit ● Time is provided within the school day for co-planning between special and general educators and the ENL teachers to ensure that curriculum is infused with UDL strategies and supports, and supports for ELLs ● The new Instructional Focus will be to build teachers’ capacity to develop rigor in their instruction by revising their task and execution through the lens of high level questioning and discussion techniques. The Quality Review and the PPO Rating identify this as an aspect requiring more work. 3.3 Teachers use a number of ways to gather data on their students before, during and after class including: ● Formative and summative assessments 2018-19 CEP 17  ● Skedula ● Attendance ● IEPs – these are known well and general educators take part in IEP data gathering, in IEP meetings and time is built into the school day for ICT co-planning ● ELL language levels – the ENL teachers use a push-in model in all grades and time in built in for co-planning ● Grade Team conferences and Quality Circles/ vertical meetings/ incoming cohort data ● High tech (clickers) and low tech (thumbs up) immediate feedback protocols ● Checking for understanding questions ● Exit Slips/ reflective or process writing, one-on-one conferences, student self-assessments ● Observation of group work discussions, recording of process ● Extended student work products, real world products such as publications, performances, formal debates, essays, tests, quizzes, and eliciting prior knowledge; in response to the city-wide grading policy guidelines we will do more work from September 2016 on building in mastery and designing curriculum backward from the assessment ● Item analysis, scholarship report analysis, task analysis Reviewing Advance ratings, unit and lesson plans often detail how data will be gathered to drive instruction and/or how units have been adapted to meet the needs of specific learners using UDL strategies, re-teaching, multiple modalities, enrichment and extension. The Quality Review and the PPO Rating identify this as an aspect requiring more work. 3.4 The school leader has provided time during the school day and facilitation for teachers for regular grade team meetings. Initially meetings focused on student performance (academic, social and emotional). While this continues, and has been extended in June to include vertical team meetings, meetings are increasingly focusing on instruction in various ways: ● Looking at student work ● Looking at teacher work ● Interdisciplinary discussions around common concept and vocabulary/ instructional supports (e.g. geometry and earth science; ELA and global studies; art and ELA)/ adjusting when concepts are taught/ selecting texts that parallel a peer’s discipline ● Instructional rounds, with a specific focus, by grade ● Neighborhood walks (the 10 th grade team has completed two Lower Manhattan walks with the intention of exploring how the neighborhood can support hands-on learning in all disciplines) ● Instructional methodology across the whole grade – e.g. high stakes lesson starter to ensure on-time behavior; prompts to ensure quality student-to-student discussion; re-drafting and feedback to ensure more fluent writing; publishing, performance and gallery displays – going public with student work 2018-19 CEP 18  ● Rubrics are being developed to include skills taught within the grade team (e.g. artistic skills within biology; writing and presentation skills within marine biology; math skills within earth science; technology skills within ELA; writing and publishing within Spanish) ● ICT teachers typically co-plan and co-teach in two or three disciplines within one grade and act as an additional conduit of information from teacher to teacher ● New electives have been designed that are purposefully inter-disciplinary – e.g History of New York, African Diaspora, Food Fight, History of Art, and The Power of Publishing, ● ScriptEd, where students learn coding and are prepared for competitive, high-profile paid summer internships with technology start-ups and more established enterprises, is a continuing elective. This has enabled students to receive full scholarships based on their unique skills ● Teacher-to-Teacher (T2T) workshops have introduced teachers to skills and practices not commonly associated with their discipline. T2T workshops have been facilitated by teachers from the 4 core disciplines and PE, art, special education and technology ● Grade-wide events like the 9 th grade Night of the Arts require the entire grade to work collaboratively as they showcase student work to parents and as students learn to talk reflectively about their learning – what they are learning and who and how they have struggles to master new ideas and skills College Access: Research and Action will commence its third year with us in September 2019 (and summer work is continuing with the coach and guidance counselors). This college readiness program is infused into advisories 9-12 and is a cohesive school-wide program to support first generation college aspirants. The Framework for Great Schools Report 2016 awards the school four “strong areas” under Collaborative Teachers: Inclusive Classroom Instruction, Quality professional Development, School Commitment , and Peer Collaboration . Last year, each grade team was tasked with developing one new inter-disciplinary unit from scratch that bridges two, three or all four core disciplines and/or art, foreign languages, electives, health and PE. This will continue in the 2016-17 school year. 3.5 Teachers give formative and summative assessments but their analysis of data and the resulting short term and long term changes is inconsistent with less evidence of short term adjustments and more evidence of long term adjustments. Student reflection is evident in some classrooms and increasing; student ownership of learning is meager. Teachers use multiple data sources. Various tools are being used in most classrooms (especially ICT classrooms) to record and process real-time data. Additionally, most teachers use exit slips or similar protocols (see above) in most lessons. Increasing time devoted to student group work enables teachers to listen-in and record student thinking – again a rich in-time data source. Grade teams analyze scholarship data and put individual plans in place for “low hanging fruit” and others who need supports. Each grade team has an inquiry team that looks in depth at a small number of students (next year the focus will be on students with disabilities) to learn how to best support their growth. Grade teams are familiar with the green report and know which students are on-track to graduate/grade promotion, which are approaching and which are deficient. Guidance counselors work with grade teams on reading transcripts so they can advise students and steer them toward AIS and after-school tutoring, mentoring, enrichment and credit-recovery. Timely/in-class adjustments are evident in about 50% of classes. Advance data and instructional rounds data illustrate that in many classrooms either the data is not collected or the data is collected but does not translate into immediate 2018-19 CEP 19  adjustments such as re-teaching, re-grouping (especially in ICT classes where this is easy to do), and introduction of scaffolds or new resources (UDL). Teachers are beginning to have reflective conversations around curriculum and make changes for future curriculum and pedagogy; this is especially evident in ICT classes. Tasks need to be infused with Depth of Knowledge (DOK), more student-centered (in alignment with the instructional focus) and universal Design for Learning (UDL) needs to be more frequently infused to ensure the access of all students to the common core general education curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students access to AP courses will increase by 10% for all student subgroups including students with IEPs. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal and assistant principal will facilitate professiona development aligned to Depth of Knowledge (DoK), the creation of rigorous and student-centered tasks and using Universal Design for Learning (UDL) to access those tasks. Professional time will be set aside on Professional Mondays and Tuesdays for teacher PLC teams who have been coached to share their learning with peers. All students, Students with disabilities (SWDs). Coaching will take place September-February. Peer sharing will take place November-May. Assistant Principals and Principal Special educators started a program two years whereby they prepared selected Students with disabilities (SWDs) to actively participate in writing their IEP and facilitating the IEP meeting. This will be ramped up for that each special educator will do this with at least 15 SWDs during the 2017-18 year. Families will be an essential part of this process. Per session will be set aside to provide coaching time between teacher and student at the end of the school day. Parents are routinely invited into the school to visit classrooms for instructional rounds. Time is set aside after a one-hour visit to debrief low inference data and write a concise report that is shared with faculty. Prospective parents of ELLs and SWDs are invited in at various points of the year to visit pertinent programs - this helps with making informed school choice in September and October and as an orientation in April and May. September-June All studets SWD and their families AP for instruction, Principal and Special Educational Lead Teacher September/October and April/May Principal and Parent Coordinator All parents and parents of ELLs and SWDs September-June Principal, APs As an alternative to traditional tutoring, after school activities will build up spoken and written literacy skills of struggling students through activities such as: book group, StoryCorps, performance, mural club, student publications and performance. Teachers will be offered per session to design and facilitate an after-school activity. Each program has an element of performance to which family members will be invited. SWDs will showcase and explain their work to family audiences. all students and their family members 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are routinely invited into the school to visit classrooms for instructional rounds. Time is set aside after a one-hour visit to debrief low inference data and write a concise report that is shared with faculty. Prospective parents of ELLs and SWDs are invited in at various points of the year to visit pertinent programs. The principal, assistant principal and responsible for the implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. , myON Literacy, New York City, ScriptEd, CARA, Per session for after school activities, Per diem training cost, Per session for IEP facilitation with students, Per session for curriculum development, Per session for AP for all Support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year credit accumulation (February 2019) will be examined by the team and outreach to family members will take place. The team will aspire to achieve a 10% increase from the previous cohort of SWDs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fall transcripts Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5.2. The primary venue for addressing students’ social-emotional needs is the grade team meeting attended by all teachers, the guidance counselor and the social worker. The team uses a strengths-based practice to discuss students; invites students and family members to Quality Circles and puts an Action Plan in place which is reviewed and, when necessary, redesigned. In case of Tier 3 interventions, the social worker and the principal meet with the team and student design a plan, which is then shared with the student and parent. There are several CBO and Central partnerships that enable the school to build capacity around social-emotional issues such as The Future Project, The Anti-Defamation League (ADL), College For Every Student (CFES), The Office for Safety and Youth Development (OSYD) and The Office of School Health (OSH), The Leadership Program Grade teams have been in existence for three years. The principal, along with administration, deans, guidance counselors, teachers and social worker began establishing systems to support students around a social/emotional (PBIS) initiative: Established a school culture team to begin designing a more progressive discipline initiative. ● This team was created to examine, coordinate and extend services and supports to students that will result in a more peaceful and embracing school community. The team met 6 times last school year. ● The team designed and implementing a re-entry protocol for students on suspension or long-term absences. ● in October 2015, the social workers and dream director, supported by the principal and teachers, initiated a weekly three-period forum Hot Topics with Hot Pockets in response to the Black Lives Matters movement. This is on-going and becoming student-facilitated. Issues are wide-ranging including: racism, sexism, the presidential debates, immigration, LGBTQ issues and more. ● College for Every Student ( CFES) leaders have been training student mentors and have established mentor-mentee partnerships. Upper classmen mentored under classmen and also provided tutoring services ● In September 2015 an ADL-trained teacher designed an ADL elective provided training for 2 teachers and 30 students in peer leadership. This work will be launched in advisories December 2015 ● Student Tamana Yousef conducted a structured conversation session with students and adults around … 2018-19 CEP 23  ● Spirit Week – senior banquet, student-teacher basketball game ● The Future Project Coffeehouse and CFES Lounge are venues for students to discuss issues of interest like sexuality, gender inequality, race, gender assignment and assertiveness 5.3 There are a number of programs that have begun (or are planned) to work with our staff, students and families to promote a safe and healthy environment. ● Designing a school-wide program that will focus on harnessing student voice to transform school practice. We are working with StoryCorps and a student publication initiative with NYC Writing Project. ● The head dean participated in a six-Saturday course in Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI) with funding from OSYD. Beginning in September 2015, the dean will utilize effective strategies and skills during his daily interaction with students, especially those who engage in persistent negative behavior. This will turn crisis situations into learning opportunities for students with chronic patterns of self-defeating behaviors. ● Six staff members completed a six-week restorative justice circles professional development with OSYD. The intent is to introduce circles in September 2015. In addition, this team turn-keyed a portion of the training to 6-8 teachers, one dean and two parents for 4 2-hour sessions in June 2015. We have experimented with the use of this technique where a serious disturbance has occurred in a classroom and an adult got into the classroom to debrief the incident with students and encourage them to express their feelings. This process is then repeated when the student is reintroduced into the classroom. ● The Leadership Program designed three workshops for parents: Family Talk, Successful Communications, Responding to Challenging Behaviors, Keeping it Cool and Managing Conflict/Anger. ● Wellness program through Leadership Program in the 9 th grade health class ● In May 2015 The Office of School Health opened a Connecting Adolescents to Comprehensive Healthcare (CATCH) program with one resident nurse and one visiting doctor to provide a range of reproductive health services 5.4 ● Grade teams are currently proactive, know students well and engage in Quality Circles, Kid Talk, inquiry and IEP information gathering. ● Advisories give the advisor the opportunity to get to know approximately 16-18 students well and advocate for them and ensure family communication is consistent and robust. ● The Future Project has built a team of student leaders that work on specific projects to enhance school culture and promote student voice ● To ensure that Students with Disabilities (SWDs) receive services the school hired an additional 3 Special Educators this year for September 2015, created additional ICT classes to promote least restrictive environment and fully immersed the guidance counselors and Social Worker into grade teams. ● Through the Danielson Framework (Domain 2) and our school’s instructional focus, teachers are evaluated on how well the implement positive interactions and social emotional skills. 5.5 2018-19 CEP 24  ● The dean, AP Security and principal frequently review OORS data for suspensions, nature of infractions, location of incidents, referrals per student etc. which helps target responses such as meeting with student, Tier 3 intervention, referral to social workers, additional security in a location etc. ● On-line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data showed a spike in assaults which prompted the Principal, deans and Assistant Principal of School Safety to review OORS report and analyze incidences and discuss methods that could have been implemented to avoid these incidences. ● The social worker and a special educator provided professional development on Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBAs) and Behavior Intervention Plans (BIPs) for grade teams Grade teams have been gathering data to assist FBAs and have been active participants in monitoring FBAs ffice Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in students who are not on grade level after receiving social emotional support. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All advisory teachers have been trained to facilitate Restorative Justice Circles. From September 2016 all advisories will feature circles at least once a month. Students in selected advisories Peer Mentoring will be provided by the ADL trained students to provide leadership, assertiveness and anti-bullying for selected advisory groups. Students in conflict Principal Guidance Counselor Restorative Justice Circles take place monthly September-June September 2016-June 2017 Teachers will develop lesson plans and curriculum to support LGBTQ students All students September 2016-June 2017 Principal and 3 Showcase School Ambassadors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Council meetings will be held once a month for input in general. Specific meetings will be held with targeted students and their parent/ guardian. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session training rate to pay for Restorative Justice training , Anti-Defamation League, College For Every Student, Per session training rate for StoryCorps, Per session for Restorative Justice, Peer Mentoring, Conflict Mediation and Storycorps. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Dean, Guidance and Principal will examine monthly suspension and incident data and feed data back to grade teams. By February 20178 there will be a 15% drop of incidents in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data will be provided by OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 4.2 The school leader has put in place a number of initiatives to ensure that instructional practices and strategies address all student goals and needs, such as: ● Grade Team meetings that look at teacher work-in-development and student work with a protocol; these meetings also gather information for or host IEP meetings thus enabling all teachers to be familiar with goals. Some teachers (e.g. 9 th grade ELA teacher) use student portfolios for reflective work and student goal setting. Portfolios and goals are passed along to the 10 th grade ELA teacher. This needs to become a perennial school-wide rather than occasional practice. ● Coaching in Global Studies 9 and 10 th , ELA, Earth Science, and ICT partnerships in most disciplines ● Regular PD on Mondays, Chancellor’s Conference Days and after-school ● Teachers use multiple data sources to adjust curriculum, unit and lesson plans, including exit slips and other types of formative assessments. ● Inquiry teams at each grade level study how changes in instructional practice impact the achievement of struggling students. Reviewing Advance ratings, unit and lesson plans often detail how data will be gathered to drive instruction and/or how units have been adapted to meet the needs of specific learners using UDL strategies, re-teaching, multiple modalities, enrichment and extension. This is increasingly evident in plans and in classroom practice though is absent from about 20% of classrooms. 4.3 The school leader has put in place structures that allow teachers to provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. ● Advance feedback that is specific and addresses issues like task predicts performance and selecting a small number of power standards that are infused throughout the unit ● Time is provided within the school day for co-planning between special and general educators and the ESL teacher to ensure that curriculum is infused with UDL strategies and supports, and supports for ELLs ● Coaching has been provided for most ICT teams to ensure that curriculum design and pedagogy supports all types of learners; this will continue. 2018-19 CEP 28  ● Teacher grade teams meet twice weekly and engage in conversations about how to best meet the needs of struggling students ● While ICT coaching has been and will be continue to be provided by Goldmansour, UDL with multiple points of access and the use of appropriate technology is inconsistent and needs to be infused into all classes. Curriculum refinements by general education, special education and ESL teachers during co-planning are bringing more UDL practices into curriculum. Stability of ICT teams (most or all will remain constant next year) means that the infusion of UDL will continue. The non-ICT classes are places where UDL is least visible with some notable exceptions (e.g. art and art history.) Teachers are beginning to have reflective conversations around standards and curriculum to make changes for future curriculum and pedagogy; this is especially evident in ICT classes. Tasks need to be infused with Depth of Knowledge (DOK), more student-centered (in alignment with the instructional focus) and universal Design for Learning (UDL) needs to be more frequently infused to ensure the access of all students to the common core general education curriculum. Two grade teams have started to do basic inter-disciplinary work and want to extend this next year. They have looked at: ● Common language and concepts ● Readjusting pacing calendars so that complimentary topics are taught at the same time ● Purposeful inter-disciplinary planning between geometry and earth science; ELA and global studies; living environment and ELA ● Designing rubrics that draw on skills and concepts taught by peers – e.g. artistic representation in Living Environment ● Common classroom routines and rituals grade or school-wide ● And aspire to co-design inter-disciplinary units from scratch Time has been set aside on occasional Monday professional sessions for 90-minute inter-disciplinary grade-based curriculum workshops 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. ● The NYCWP Consultant has worked with the elective writing teacher and the ESL teacher to help them develop curriculum with the student at the center – e.g. memoir writing. ● The advisory program puts the student at the center; curriculum addresses college readiness, transition, career preparedness. ● In the academic year 2015-16, Storycorps will introduce 29 lessons that guide students to examine three prompts: Where are we from? Who are we? Where are we going? This is aligned with the Common Ap. ● Instructional Rounds with parents, students and teachers look at rigor, task, and student to student collaboration ● The Future Project The Future Project is a national education non-profit that invented the Dream Director. Dream Directors are transformational leaders trained to help young people discover their dreams and put them into action, building 21st Century skills. Embedded in high-schools, Dream Directors work with the whole school community — 2018-19 CEP 29  teachers, administrators and students — to begin to identify and change disempowering norms that hold students back. Dream Directors believe young people must lead school change so they start the year by forming a Dream Team, a group of students who want to help transform their school from the inside out. With their Dream Director’s guidance, the students come up with ambitious Future Projects to channel their passions into action — launching clubs, campaigns, and so much more. As students see their Future Projects through, they learn how to build a team, enroll others in their vision, and move them to pursue their own goals. The Senior Capstone Project: The Senior Capstone Project is an opportunity for select seniors to embark on a journey to build a student based, project driven, passion inspired project for academic credit. Through the mentorship of teachers and the Dream Director, select seniors take on a project to built something that reflects learnings on something they are passionate and curious about through interactive exploration both in and out of the school's walls. The Project culminates in a college style collegium review. ● Student assignments often include opportunities for student choice. For example, students may write memoirs or narratives based on their experiences; students may conduct interviews and write profiles about individuals of their choosing; students may conduct research on a topics selected from a menu of options provided by the teacher. ● We aspire to have SWDs play a role in co-designing ICT lessons. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources. ● In ELA and writing elective classes, students are taught to give warm and cool feedback to peers as they develop multiple drafts. ● Most teachers use exit slips in most lessons and make adjustments to lesson plans the following day ● Teachers use item analysis data from Regents Exams and summative assessments to inform their planning of curriculum and unit plans ● When conducting group work, many teachers listen-in and record student thinking, allowing them to make mid-lesson adjustments ● Each grade team has an inquiry team that looks in depth at a small number of students (next year the focus will be on students with disabilities) to learn how to best support their growth. ● Grade teams are familiar with the green report and know which students are on-track to graduate/grade promotion, which are approaching and which are deficient. Guidance counselors work with grade teams on reading transcripts so they can advise students and steer them toward AIS and after-school tutoring, mentoring, enrichment and credit-recovery. Timely in-class adjustments are evident in about 50% of classes. Advance data and instructional rounds data illustrate that in many classrooms either the data is not collected or the data is collected but does not translate into immediate adjustments such as re-teaching, re-grouping (especially in ICT classes where this is easy to do), and introduction of scaffolds or new resources (UDL). Teachers give formative and summative assessments but their analysis of data and the resulting short term and long term changes is inconsistent with less evidence of short term adjustments and more evidence of long term adjustments. Student reflection is evident in some classrooms and increasing; student ownership of learning is meager. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each subject will have a years worth of unit plans to be used for vertical alignment in each grade of discipline. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional team time will be used to initiate inter-disciplinary conversations. Teachers will use a protocol to look at work-in-progress. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 NYCWP Consultant, APs and Principal Grade teams will use selected Monday professional time to review and improve curriculum, specifically examining the quality of teacher-designed tasks and assignments. A protocol will be used to facilitate discussion around the rigor and accessibility of assignments for all learners. All teachers September - May Principal and APs, NYCWP Consultant NY Cares – a team of three teachers involved in the CFES program will attend training about further developing a college-going culture among our student body. CFES Teachers Assistant Principals and Teacher Leaders NY Cares/ CFES, September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent council meetings will be held on a monthly basis to plan family activities for information around college-bound students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Training rate for Storycorps ,Per session for curriculum development review, Per diem training, New York Cares Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During Regents Week January 26, each grade team will share one inter-disciplinary unit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data will be extracted from Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school vision is articulated in various documents that the principal worked on with stakeholders during the 2013-2014 school year; these have been shared often during professional development and team time, and they are frequently profiled (plus progress monitoring) in the weekly electronic bulletin Green Market . They are articulated in letters home, the Parent Newsletter, information for prospective new teachers, during SLT and PTA meetings, meetings with the SGO and other student forums. Thus these are known by all and consist of: ● School-wide Instructional Focus ● Mission Statement ● School-wide Grading Policy ● Richard R. Green High School of Teaching Classroom Guidelines – The Student-Centered Classroom with Experiential Learning Teachers design lessons using the Student-Centered Classroom with Experiential Learning guidelines; professional conversations and Advance feedback take place through the lens of School-wide Instructional Focus. The SLT does instructional rounds through the lens of the School-wide Instructional Focus (two or three per year) and teacher teams, both inter-disciplinary and disciplinary, also do instructional rounds. Teachers from partnership schools where students intern as part of the Teaching Academy know the Mission Statement. During Parent-Teacher conferences the School-wide Grading Policy guides the discussion. Partnerships like College for Every Student (CFES), Achievement Via Individual Determination (AVID), the Future Project and Sponsors for Educational Opportunity (SEO) Scholars are aligned to the school-wide goals of providing a rigorous educational experience that will prepare students for college and beyond. These partnerships ensure that the vision is infused within the student body. Grade team meetings are evidence based. Teams examine scholarship reports, student self-assessments, team assessments, IEPs, Skedula, transcripts, report cards, narratives from parents and students, social worker’s observations, psychologists reports, OT etc. Data are rich and multiple. Budget decisions have been made in response to a lower student register and fewer SWDs: one fewer math teacher (with one special education teacher teaching a math class), four special educators teaching electives, one special educator taking responsibility for C-DOS, and a part-time library teacher in place of a full-time library teacher. Special 2018-19 CEP 34  educators are or have acquired a second license to minimize the likelihood of excessing as the number of SWDs continues to drop in line with Shared Path to Success changes. Coaches and consultant include: a New York City Writing Project Consultant (2 days a week), ICT coach 8-days during the year to work with general and special education teacher partnerships, and a Teacher Development Coach (3 cycles during the year) to work with science teachers.) The CARA coach visits twice a month for a half day. Guidance counselors and the social worker have been included in grade teams and training has been provided for teacher facilitators. Like all NYC schools, the Advance system provides a theoretical and organizational platform for observations. The principal and AP meet regularly to review progress, set goals, visit classrooms together and review each others’ observations. Post-observation conferences are held when there are issues or when the teacher requests one, otherwise feedback is largely written. Formal observations have pre- and post-observation conferences. Conferences are inquiry-based with teacher voice. Evidence-based progress monitoring tracks the school’s progress with the SCEP goals and is done in conjunction with or shared with grade teams and the SLT. Initiatives are put in place to address challenges. Note, initiatives are designed not just by leadership but the whole school community. For example: ● In response to students struggling as independent writers, the school leader asked the NYCWP Consultant to work with the writing teacher to develop a writing workshop less based on text and more on personal experience that would result in a publishing party ● In response to students struggling as independent readers, the school leader asked the NYCWP Consultant to use NYSTL funds to purchase high interest young adult fiction and non-fiction for an independent reading program launch in September 2015 ● In response to poor student performance in the first marking period of the year, the 9 th grade team put specific initiatives put in place to increase student success (increased home contact, re-teaching, modified timelines, learning buddies, increasing UDL, more frequent feedback to students and encouraging parents to get a Jupiter Grades password  In response to ESL students struggling as writers and feeling their voice under-represented in the school, the ESL teacher requested the NYCWP consultant work with him on student voice and to help him develop a professionally produced student magazine. He has also trained with StoryCorpsU and has two Columbia University students work twice a week as debate coaches with the ESL class.  In response to students struggling as readers and writers (as documented in Advance and articulated in post-observation feedback), all English teachers will attend the Educating Powerful Writers professional learning at Teachers College on November 3 and will use the new curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The principal will provide professional development opportunities for the school community to increase skill set in social emotional learning of the bottom third school wide so that their credit accumulation improve by 10%. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). NYCWP Consultant will continue to support teachers two-days a week as they extend their experience of the writing process and ability to develop independent student writers who are able to provide and receive feedback from peers and others. Students will be guided to take a piece through multiple drafts until the work is ready for performance or publication. The Consultant will assist teachers across the curriculum as they develop an understanding of how low stakes, process and high stakes writing may be used in writing-to-learn. One performance event will take place in February supported by the Future Project and Storycorps, and one performance and publishing event will take place in May supported by the school. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Self-selected teachers across the curriculum . September 2018-June 2019 NYCWP Consultant NYCWP Consultant will continue to support teachers two-days a week as they design and facilitate T2T workshops for peers within the school and city-wide thereby building professional capacity. Self-selected teachers across the curriculum All ELA and one special education teachers will attend the November 3rd roll-out PD for the Developing Powerful Writers curriculum at teachers college. On-going PD will be provided in Grade Teams on Mondays after school. ELA and Social Studies Teachers Parent writing for publication and performance group will convene in November 2016 All parents September-June NYCWP Consultant November 2018-June 2019 November 2018-May 2019 AP Instruction and Principal APO, NYCWP Writing Consultant and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent council will meet once a month to address key issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 36  The Future Project, CFES , Achievement Via Individual Determination (AVID)), SEO Scholars (No cost to the school), NYCWP Consultant, student and parent publications, Spring Gallery Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will share student writing on selected Mondays during professional time at three points during the year- November, January, and March. In February 2019 the AP Supervision and Principal will collect and examine sample student writing portfolios looking at low through high stakes writing and examine for: frequency/stamina/improvement over time/student meta-cognition Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmarks will include midterm exams, finals and summative regents exams. Teacher observation and formative assessment will be used to mark interim progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leader writes monthly (sometimes more frequent) letters in Spanish and English to parents, the Parent Coordinator sends out a monthly newsletter in both languages, Jupiter Grades send frequent shorter emails to parents and School Messenger calls go out daily with information around attendance, lateness, school activities and more. The website is used by many students and families and will be up-graded in the 2015-16 school year. As mentioned in the overview, parents remark on the quick response time to parent communications with 90% of parents in the LES making favorable comments about the ease of communication. The lobby is a primary information center with the Parents Center stocked with booklets and pamphlets, the lobby itself with posters showing The Leadership Program’s monthly workshops for parents, the After-school programs for student, an electronic and a huge paper calendar. The librarian invites parents into the library and is designing an Open Evening for them. Parents will be invited to five parental events throughout the year (the four city-wide events plus one school-wide events) and two of these will be devoted to showcasing and celebrating student work. Parents have been and will be invited to participate in four two-hour workshops facilitated by teachers for teachers and parents that introduce them to Restorative Justice Circles in May-June 2016. Regular meetings take place with families for co-planning – for example IEP meetings (which are always done with members of the general education team and often done with all members of the grade team) and Quality Circles where information is gathered and an Action Plan is put in place with a follow meeting to monitor progress. With more challenging students there are Tier 3 interventions like FBAs and BIPs. Teachers have 40-minutes a week devoted to home contact which is generally by e-mail and phone although most teachers spend additional time. Teachers call with positive and challenging feedback about academic and behavioral performance; Advisors call their 15-18 advisory families frequently. Future students and their families are actively recruited. Prospective parents of incoming 9 th graders are taken by the principal, AP and Parent Coordinator into classrooms during instructional time prior to the submission of student applications. Each October and November the school holds evening and day-time Open Houses. The principal hosts two instructional rounds with the SLT each year – one in November and one in December. The team looks for a specific focus for example rigor of task or student participation and the instructional focus. Additional parents are invited (although have not yet accepted). Parents are invited in regularly for evening events – e.g. from the school year 2014-15 in September for an advisory workshop and an examination of the School-wide Grading Policy, in December for a Holiday Night of the Arts (song, theater, dance and art) and each May for a Night of the Arts (Art Gallery). Parents frequently co-chaperone trips to 2018-19 CEP 38  galleries and museum visits, movie outings and field days. Grade teams are planning the 2015-16 parents invited events. Professional articles are shared with parents in the newsletter and the SLT, where text-based discussions have taken place around several educational articles. Two community partnerships provide support: ● Monthly parent workshops are hosted by The Leadership Program ● Trinity Church is offering occasional parent workshops (potential topics – English, Computer Literacy, Understanding Real Estate, Art and Design) Teachers update Jupiter Grades weekly and sign-up parents and provide them with their passwords during parent-teacher conferences. Grade teams invite parents to, and respond to parent requests for Quality Circles. At these times, parents are asked for their expertise and contribute toward the design and implementation of the Student Action Plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, two new school functions will result in a 5% increase in parent attendance for school wide events. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Family members in the writing for publication and performance group will hold a publishing party and performance of written word Skedula is an effective tool for reciprocal communication. Family members were given passwords and a quick introduction during Freshman Orientation. This will be repeated for family members of all grades during the five times that parents will be invited in during the 2016-17 school year. School messenger, another tool to facilitate school to home communication, will continue to make daily calls to enhance parental information. The school website has been developed throughout the years and would benefit from streamlining and simplification so it can easily be updated by school support staff. Educational Networks will redesign and add features. In May 2018 family members will be invited to attend a Spring Gallery/ Night of the Arts. Family members will view student work and performances. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Family Members Family members May 2018 APO, PC and NYCWP Writing Consultant September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Instruction and Parent Coordinator Educational Networks Consultant, Webmaster, Self-selected Teachers APO and AP Instruction Family members August-September 2019 APO and AP Instruction May 2019 Principal and Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Leadership Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Restorative Justice Circles, Skedula ($8,100), School Messenger ($850), Trinity Church, The Leadership Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 40  X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor and record family member attendance at events commencing with the September 28th Family Welcome Evening. After the Fall P-T Conferences attendance data will be examined. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fall Attendance Log (comparison 2016 with 2017) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SWDs and students in lowest 1/3 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive notebooks, myOn Literacy, Creating Powerful Writers Columbia University students pushing-into the ESLclass and coaching debate skills ELLs Students not passing class and students that need to pass Regents Examinations Emathinstruction.com LINCT SWDs, ELL and students in lowest 1/3, students that need to pass Regents Examinations Purposely constructed student groups with peer readers SWDs, ELLs and students in lowest 1/3,students that need to pass Regents Examinations Purposely constructed student groups with peer readers Mandated counseling as required Mandated counseling as required Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Push-in, after-school club, peer mentoring both Push-in during class during After school classes for selected groups of no more than 12 after Saturday Regents preparation After school classes for selected groups of no more than 12 Saturdays after Saturday Regents preparation After school classes for selected groups of no more than 12 Saturday after Saturday Regents preparation Saturday Mandated counseling as required Mandated counseling as required 2018-19 CEP 42  2018-19 CEP 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The number of students in Temporary Housing is 21. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Emergency instructional supplies in a book bag (calculator, binder, pens, pencils, markers, planner, loose leaf paper), text and trade books, and gym uniform. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title 1 school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 44  Emergency instructional supplies in a book bag (calculator, binder, pens, pencils, markers, planner, loose leaf paper), text and trade books, and gym uniform 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title 1 school. 2018-19 CEP 45  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers have been recruited using new teacher finder with an emphasis on programs such a Teach for America and Teaching Fellows. Retention has been promoted by providing quality professional development in response to requests by teachers and frequently designed and facilitated by teachers. New teachers receive mentoring from peers. Professional learning is supported with weekly after-school sessions that include: Book Study Groups (small groups read and respond to a school-wide text), teacher-to-teacher workshops (designed and facilitated by teachers for peers), Advisory Planning with the CARA coach, Visual Teaching Strategies (VTS) for all social studies teacher, one special educator, the principal and AP Instruction, ICT co-planning and co-facilitation coaching (8 days a year.) The principal's learning is supported by monthly instructional rounds with a small group of principals facilitated by the superintendent and in the larger borough monthly meetings. One borough-wide for this year is to create more inclusive schools and principals will be working with Goldmansour and with Dr. David Connor. A coach works with the principal and APs monthly on the Advance ratings system - this includes classroom visits and calibration using the Danielson Framework. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly PD is designed by the principal and assistant principals for all teachers and this includes teacher-to-teacher workshops. Principal, APs and teachers participate in BSC professional learning opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 46  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade PLC and Department teams are used to discuss and examine summative assessments. This information is collected and processed by the team dedicated to making final selections. The AP Instruction and United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Chapter Chair consult with grade teams before making decisions and elicit feedback during the year to enable them to make quality decisions the following year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Page 35 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 309,585 n/a X 2018-19 CEP 47  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local n/a n/a 3,375,251 X Pages 21, 22, 30, 31 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 48  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Richard R. Green High School of Teaching, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Richard R Green High School of Teaching will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. . Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Richard R. Green High School of Teaching, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 52  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 55  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The overall supplemental support and targeted attendance initiatives will help to develop student academic skills by offering academic intervention and attendance incentives to improve the school wide average credit accumulation and Regents examination passing scores. Students outcomes will improve in credit accumulation, and summative assessment by 5% by January and 10% by June. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Increase the number of students that have 90% or above attendance by 10 percent by June 2019 Expand Learning Time programs to achieve 30 or more hours for 100 students of ELT programming by June 2019 Increase parent engagement by 10 percent by offering relevant parent workshops based on parental requests Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving the Community School Goals will positively impact students in a holistic way, leading them to become better learners and proficient students, thereby helping them achieve the academic goals of increase credit accumulation and summative assessment by 5% by January and 10% by June. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal The Leadership Program 100 students ELT Achieve 100 students receiving 30 hours of programming by June 2019 The Leadership Program students whose attendance is below 90% Attendance Support Increase students with 90% attendance by 10% by June 2019 2018-19 CEP 56  The Leadership Program Increase parent engagement by 10% by June 2018 Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment parents and families of students Family Engagement entire student body Health and Wellness Increase parent engagement by 10% by June 2019 Offer vision services through the DOHMH, with glasses frames paid for by Warby Parker by June 2019 Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Leadership Program will use their grant allotment of $66,914 and Per Session allotment of $24,978 to pay for Leadership Trainers and school-staff to conduct ELT activities (afterschool clubs/events & academic enrichment sessions Monday - Thursday) and Parent Workshops. The after school clubs will utilize The Leadership Program's curriculum to address the student's needs and after school club objectives. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The CSD will organize and lead the ELT components (after school clubs and academic enrichment activities), will talk with students and staff to hear what their needs are and what visions they have for the school, will have weekly 2018-19 CEP 57  meetings with the Principal to determine the needs of the school and how to address them, will have weekly Attendance meetings to address the school's attendance initiatives, and will organize monthly Parent Workshops and conduct surveys from parents regarding their needs and wishes for the school. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students (1) The Leadership Program, The Future Project, College For Every Student, Script Ed. (2) Members of the Community School Team will be selected by November 10th. The CST meetings will be conducted by the CSD on a monthly basis (dates TBD), being structured so as to display the data from current activities, to hear critiques from all stakeholders, and to strategize for a better actualization of our Community School's Partnership Goals. (3) We will target those students who are between 80-90% attendance with attendance initiatives, as well as thorough encouragement and home visits for those students with less than 50% attendance. The data sorter will greatly help find and select those students on a weekly basis. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The 21st CCLC grant, The Leadership Program's curriculum and Experiential Learning Cycle, The Leadership Program's facilitators (Leadership Trainers), and a willing school staff who's able to collaborate and put the needs of others first. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 22nd: CSD was hired. September 25th: CSD started working. October 25th: first Parent Workshop conducted. October 26th: first day of ELT programming. June 2018: end dates for ELT, Parent Workshops, and Professional Developments. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Richard R. Green High School of Teaching Borough Manhattan School Number 580 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joan Weaver Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Adrienne Almeida Teacher/Subject Area Karla Nolasco -Spanish Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Jackie Mayol Coach type here School Counselor N/A Parent Evelyn Hernandez Parent Coordinator Lisa Morales-Miley Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 505 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.74%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher created assessments are utilized to assess literacy. The assessments indicate that students need to continue to develop their reading and writing skills. Therefore, literacy development in all classes for all the students continues to be one of the school's initiatives this year and part of the instructional plan. Additionally the school utilizes reading and writing online programs and provides books in English and Spanish, and audio books. This will help support reading and writing development. In addition, to listening and speaking, the ENL teacher emphasizes the development of reading and writing skills in her classes. Regents examinations results are collected and analyzed to guide instruction and planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teachers will attend professional development facilitated by the Field Support Center. Assessment data is disseminated during grade team and department meetings. Teachers meet in grade team meetings and department meetings 2018-19 CEP 60  to analyze student work and identify significant performance issue. The team creates a measurable student goal and identify strategies designed to address the issue. The team monitors implementation progress and effect on student performance. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate student success by measuring student growth in all four language modalities, reading, writing, listening and speaking as shown on the NYSESLAT. The most recent scores on the RLAT results show that the majority of our students scored , mostly commanding, expanding and transitioning on the NYSESLAT. 6 students scored commanding on the NYSESLAT in the spring of 2016. In 2016 3 students entered our school at the emerging level. 15 students scored at the expanding level. 4 students scored transitioning. Performance on Regents Examinations are analyzed and student performance issues are identified strategies to address gaps in student performance. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers meet in grade team and department meetings to analyze summative data results. The team creates measurable goals to address issues. The team develops strategies to address issues. For example, the following interventions : supplemental materials, i.e. adapted text, audio text, scaffolding materials, visual teaching strategies, strategic grouping, extra time to complete assignments, adaptations made to assignments directions. Alternative assignments, portfolio assessment, academic vocabulary, explicit instruction, group discussion, low stakes and high stakes writing. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This question does not apply to our school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Assessment data from the NYSESLAT and Regents Examinations are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The data pattern across proficiency levels reveal that the students' across grade levels are most challenged in the area of reading comprehension and to a lesser extent in writing. Particularly argumentative and expository writing. The mechanics of the grammar in the listening section presents a challenge as well. The students are performing the highest in the speaking modality. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures in place to disseminate this findings are the following: common planning meetings, professional development school meetings, grade team meetings, department meetings, Green Admin news letter. The principal and assistant principal disseminates the findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Richard R. Green has a free-standing ENL program. Instruction is delivered in an integrated and if needed stand alone English as a New Language model. Students are placed based on their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results. In the integrated ENL model the ENL teachers team teachers with core subject teachers. The ENL teachers work with collaboratively with core subject teachers to write curricula and plan instruction. Entering, Emerging and 2018-19 CEP 61  Transition students receive instruction in the stand-alone model as well as the integrated model. In case there is a need for the stand-alone model the ENL teacher provides the instruction. Students in grades 9 and 10 and grades 11 and 12 are grouped together. b. TBE program. If applicable. This questions does not apply to our school. c. DL program. If applicable. This questions does not apply to our school 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In a effort to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes as per CR Part 154 are provided, a review of students' NYSESLAT/NYSITELL and schedules is conducted and mandated minutes of instruction in each student program are verified. Changes are made in students' programs if required. Instructional minutes are provided as per the CR Part 154 mandates. Entering ELLs receive the mandated 540 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction and 180 minutes per week of ELA instruction. Transition students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction. The ENL service is provided by our certified ENL teacher by using integrated model and a stand alone class as needed. In the integrated model, the ENL teacher co teaches in core classes to provide instruction for every grade level. The students are placed according to NYSITELL scores and NYSESLAT scores. Students receive instruction in the following content: ENL, English, Math, Social Studies, Science, Art, and Physical Education. ENL and ELA are delivered using a team teaching approach in which instruction is delivered using English as a Second Language Methodologies. Native language materials such as glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are provided for students. The school does not offer a bilingual program; therefore, the program does not offer native language instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Each content area (English, Math, Social Studies and Science) in the Freestanding program is delivered using ENL methodologies. Argumentative writing, non-fiction reading, academic vocabulary, listening and oral language development are taught in the different content areas. In order to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, differentiated instructional methodologies which incorporate ENL strategies will be employed to address both those students needing further support and those ready for advancement. Individualized learning plans are developed for each student to establish current level of performance, set goals and establish progress throughout the year. Content area teachers are aware of each ELL student's home language and culture and attempt to make connections to content to establish a sense of familiarity, belonging and community. All content area teaches incorporate skills based learning strategies into their lesson, including literacy based instructional strategies such as the use of context clues, sentence structure, vocabulary development, decoding skills, and skim and scan skills. Cooperative learning and peer tutoring small group instruction are tailored to the specific needs of students. There is an increased focus on metacognitive skills and strategies and increased use of scaffolded glossaries. All classrooms are equipped with SmartBoard technology allowing for interactive lessons, visual support of content specific language and audio accompaniment. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development include: the infusion of ENL methodology in content area instruction, infusion of all four language modalities, listening, speaking, reading, and writing in all classes, use of cooperative groups, analyzing assessment data to inform and improve instruction, utilization of appropriate instructional materials, the use of native language support, and native language materials. Glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and online literacy programs are utilized. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 62  When possible, student native language and literacy skills are used as a foundation for second language acquisition. For example, the use of cognates and use of the native language for expression and understanding. Students first language is validated when student are given the opportunity to express themselves in the native language if needed. The school has books in the students' home languages available for them. The school's library has books in the student native language. Glossaries are in the students native language are utilized in content areas. ELLs students have opportunities to work in collaborative groups with students that speak their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers) are placed in a program based on the Parent Survey and Program Selection Form. If the parents select ENL, these students are then placed in the appropriate freestanding ENL classes based on their NYSITELL scores and initial assessment. Both newcomers and SIFE will partake in the online literacy reading programs. There is a focus on vocabulary development, visual representations, reading logs, role play, use of manipulatives, use of realia, sentence strips. The ENL teachers design individualized instruction to meet student needs. In addition, extended one-to-one instruction is provided by the ENL teachers. Developing ELLs are provided with KWL chart, word walls, modeling, purposeful grouping, anticipation guides, graphic organizers. The long term ELLs are provided specific support in scaffolded activities to foster achievement on the NYSESLAT and NYSED Regents exams. For long term ELLs, interventions include but are not limited to the following: a focus on reading strategies, incorporating a variety or reading activities including both fiction and non-fiction/informational texts; a focus on a variety of writing activities that are based on both literary works as well as content area readings; the use of exemplars to model good writing; the use of graphic organizers to plan and organize for writing; and the use of revision, peer editing, and self-monitoring to model habits of good writers; a focus on listening strategies incorporating a variety of listening activities. Teachers utilize the following instructional strategies: differentiated instruction, scaffolding of instructional materials, QTEL strategies, note-taking strategies, graphic organizers, modeling of exemplary work and small group instruction in order to improve learners’ linguistic and academic abilities so that they become English proficient and meet State standards and graduation requirements. Teachers concentrate on teaching the Writing Process in order to support students with their academic literacy skills with a specific focus on higher-order thinking and writing skills and literary elements and techniques. The students take advantage of the web-based differentiated-instruction reading program. As of 2015/2016 former ELLs are provided with 90 minutes of ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? General Education, ENL and Special Education teachers of ELL-SWDs collaborate weekly regarding student progress. The majority of ELL-SWDs are placed is the least restrictive environment to receive instruction in the content areas. Grade level materials are used in all classes. Graphic organizers are utilized to organize and chunk information. Hands-on lessons and lessons that draw upon multiple intelligences are implemented to encourage student participation and content comprehension. ELL students are taught specific organizational, study, and test-taking skills. Other instructional strategies utilized are: graphic organizers, high lighters, read-aloud, note-taking strategies, textbook at the students identified reading levels. ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs. In order to ensure that ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ENL instruction receive the appropriate program, a review of the IEP, and ENL reports such as the RLAT, RNMR, and RLER is conducted before students are programmed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs students with disabilities are programmed according their IEPs mandates. ELL-SWDs are scheduled in core classes which an ENL teacher co-teaches to provide students with English proficiency skills in the least restrictive environment. This allows 2018-19 CEP 63  students to receive Special Education and ELL support in the least restrictive environment. During weekly grade team meetings, and common planning department meetings, the ENL teacher, Special Education teachers and General education teachers collaborate to provide scaffolds, UDL, and CCLS aligned curricula. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted academic intervention services for ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science include but are not limited to the following: Saturday school tutoring in both ENL and Math, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. . The ENL teachers provides individualized instruction to meet student needs. The Newcomer ELLs get extended one-to-one instruction with ENL teacher. Former ELLs are encouraged,if schedule allows, to attend ENL classes, as well as Saturday school programs to support advancement in their classes. ELLs with IEPs also attend Saturday school programs and tutorials. ELL and Special Education teachers collaborate weekly regarding student progress. The long term ELLs are provided specific support in scaffolded activities to foster achievement on the NYSESLAT and NYSED Regents exams. For long-term ELLs, interventions include but are not limited to the following: a focus on listening strategies, incorporating a variety of listening activities; a focus on reading strategies, incorporating a variety of reading activities including both fiction and non-fiction/informational texts; a focus on a variety of writing activities that are based on both literary works as well as content area readings; the use of exemplars to model good writing; the use of graphic organizers to plan and organize for writing; and the use of revision, peer editing and self-monitoring to model habits of good writers. All current and former ELL students (up to two years) receive test accommodations including, extended time and the use of native language glossaries/dictionaries. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will to continue to offer both the Integrated ENL model and the stand alone mode (if needed). in 2017 2018 we will analyze and evaluate data displaying credit accumulation, assessment scores, attendance, and credit accumulation. This data is being provided to help inform all staff of the needs of all ELLs and create improvement plans to address those needs. Among new electives, we will have a Philosophy class in order to foster students' critical thinking skills as well as public speaking skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This question does not apply to our school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to school programs. All ELL students are encouraged to participate in the numerous academic, athletic and social groups provided by the school, including: Peer Tutoring, Boys and Girls Softball, Boys and Girls Basketball, College for Every Student, Leadership, Future Teacher’s Club, and the Future Project. ELLs participate in our after school tutoring as well as Saturday academy for literacy development, language acquisition and Regents preparation. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ELLs are receive instruction in the core classes using the same materials as the general population students. ELLs (are exposed to text-complexity, academic vocabulary, non-fiction, fiction reading and argumentative writing in ENL classes as well as content area classes (ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science). Glossaries/dictionaries in English and their native languages are used by the students. Visuals, audio, graphic organizer are used to address the different learning styles and different proficiency levels. All classrooms are equipped with Smart Board technology allowing for interactive lessons, visual and audio support . Students have access to laptops as well as computers in the library. Textbooks specially designed for ELLs, such as, from Reading to Writing, Short Stories, Focus on Grammar (text and audio), What a World - listening 1 and What a World - listening 2 are used. ' 2018-19 CEP 64  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in multiple ways. Teachers support instruction with the use of the native language. ELLs are encouraged to use their knowledge and understanding of their native language to support their learning of English and the content areas. Materials are available for the students use. The school library offers a wide range of materials in the students native language and has access to all electronic texts in the New York City library system in multiple languages through a pilot program. The school's Library is used by teachers as a resource for developing their curricula. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Resources are age and grade level appropriate. ELLs are exposed to text complexity, academic vocabulary, non-fiction and fiction reading, reading strategies, argumentative writing, listening skills and development of oral skills. Ells are instructed using the same level of text complexity as our general education students. Resources and required services correspond to each ELLs age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is not co-located. ' 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students attend an orientation prior to the start of the school year - new student and parent orientation is given in English and the student home language. The guidance counselor meets with new ELLs who enrolled throughout the school year. Students who enrolled throughout the year are assigned a student buddy who can make the transition to the new school, culture assimilation and language acquisition smother. The parent coordinator participates in the student orientation and conducts parent outreach. The parent coordinator provides building tour and introductions to student's teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish (Levels: Beginners and Advanced) is offered to all students (including ELLs) as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This question does not apply to our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teacher programs allow for four periods of professional development opportunities each week. These meetings allow the ENL teachers to participate in grade level and departmental meetings, to case-conference students, share instructional practices and adapt content in order to support the specific academic and language needs of each student. The guidance counselors as well as the school leadership are part of the professional development. In addition, full day professional 2018-19 CEP 65  development opportunities will also give teachers and administrators exposure to strategies to support the needs of ELL students. The ENL teachers will provide the on site professional development and will incorporate strategies and activities to meet the differentiated instructional needs of ELLs. All new general education teachers will be provided with seven and a half hours of professional development on ENL methodology. Professional development will be provided during twice weekly meetings and full-day staff development throughout the year (Election Day, Chancellors Day and Anniversary Day). All ENL and content area teachers, guidance counselors and administrators will be scheduled to participate in network and central professional development offerings (e.g., Common Core Instruction for ELLs, Enhancing Instruction for ELLs Through Scaffolds and Task Analysis ). All professional development activities are aligned with the school’s Language Allocation Policy. Teachers have the opportunity to partake in weekly, bi-monthly and after school professional development facilitated by the school principal, the supervision assistant principal, leadership interns and the New York City Writing Project consultant. The professional development includes, but not limited to, Common Core Instruction, reading strategies, using non-fictional texts, argumentative writing, use of academic vocabulary, UDL, Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS). and cooperative learning. The principal maintains agenda and attendance sheet for all professional development. All teachers, including the ENL and Special Education teacher participate in the professional development. The Parent Coordinator attends professional development facilitated by central. The ENL teachers will facilitate professional development workshops for all the teachers during grade team meetings. The workshops titles will include, but not limited to: The Use of Technology to Support ELLs in Content Areas: - 12/11/2017 The teachers will practice with ELL software/online resources that pertaining to the content they teach in order to scaffold and multi-entry point into the content. Using Tier Support in Content Area Classrooms: 2/5/2018 The teachers will look at the ELL cohort profile (i.e., student performance, NYSESLAT results, and demographics) and will develop strategies of peer support for the ELLs in the content area classes. Techniques to Construct ELLs Friendly Questions: 3/19/2018 The teachers will bring a samples of questions they would ask they students and they will work to make the questions more accessible for the ELLs. Designing Entry Points for ELLs During Collaborative Learning: 5/14/2018 Teachers will practice different ways ELLs demonstrate knowledge during collaborative learning/projects. On-going throughout the year: Weekly grade team meetings Weekly department meetings Principal's Study Group ICT Coaching The ENL teachers will be scheduled to participate in central professional development offerings (e.g., Common Core Instruction for ELLs, Enhancing Instruction for ELLs Through Scaffolds and Task Analysis ). All professional development activities are aligned with the school’s Language Allocation Policy. Teachers have the opportunity to partake in weekly, bi-monthly and after school professional development facilitated by the school principal, the supervision assistant principal, leadership interns and the New York City Writing Project consultant. The professional development includes, but not limited to, Common Core Instruction, reading strategies, using non-fictional texts, argumentative writing, use of academic vocabulary, UDL, Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS), and cooperative learning. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 66  ENL teachers attend professional development facilitated by the FSC in order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154. The ENL teaches facilitate professional development for the general education teachers to meet the required 15% professional development for all teachers. Agenda and sign in sheets are maintained on file. Teachers participate in after school professional development in grade team and department meetings. The professional development includes, but not limited to, Common Core Instruction, reading strategies, using non-fictional texts, argumentative writing, use of academic vocabulary, UDL, and cooperative learning, ICT coaching. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are invited to attend annual one-on-one meetings with the ENL teacher to discuss their child’s progress as well as the program’s goals and objectives, standards assessments results, and other pertinent information. The ENL teachers reaches out to parents to invite to the annual parent conference. Bi-Lingual secretaries provide translation services. All written communication is sent to the parents in English and the parent preferred language. The ENL teachers maintains a parental outreach log and a annual individual meeting log. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental Involvement Activities affords parents of ELLs the opportunity to meet on a regular basis with the ENL teacher. Parents of ELLs are invited to attend workshop offered by the DOE, Division of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners and the Parent Academy. We also plan to offer a workshop series facilitated by The Leadership Program. The topics will cover the college process, financial aid, helping students succeed in school, Responding to Challenging Behavior, and Restorative Justice Circles in order to foster social and emotional development. The Leadership Program will facilitate the following parent workshops: Family Talk: Successful Communication - November 9, 2017 Academic Success: What's Your Child Learning Style - January 18, 2018 Keep it Cool: Managing Conflict and Anger - March 8, 2018 Power of One: Single Parenting - May 3, 2018 Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: No additional comments 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joan Weaver, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Richard R. Green High School School DBN: 02M580 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joan Weaver Title Principal Jackie Mayol Assistant Principal Lisa Morales-Miley Parent Coordinator Adrienne Almeida ENL/Bilingual Teacher Evelyn Hernandez Parent Karla Nolasco Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m580 School Name: Richard R. Green H.S. Superintendent: Marisol Bradbur The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ada Castro Secretary Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the school's written translation and oral interpretation needs, a review of the home language surveys is conducted. Additionally, a review of ATS reports (RPOB) and RHLA – Place of birth/home language indicator report and RLER is conducted to identify the students and parents home language. Anecdotal information is acquired during parent conferences and open school. ATS reports indicated there are 18 current ELL parents. The needs assessment identify 2 languages other than English spoken at English Language Learners home. The languages are Spanish, and Arabic. Home language spoken at home are Spanish (16 homes), Arabic (2 homes). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 70  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Any Cantonese French Mandinka Mandarin English Spanish Turkish TWI 3 5 9 19 0 4 1 0 487 252 1 1 0.38 0.64 1.15 2.43 0 0.51 0.13 0 62.2 32.18 0.13 0.13 3 5 9 19 7 4 1 6 488 251 1 1 0.38 0.64 1.15 2.43 0.89 0.51 0.13 0.77 62.32 32.06 0.13 0.13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent and student handbook Beginning of school year - September 2018 Included in the students planners Parent Newsletter On-going through out the year- Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use the translation unit to translate documents as well as secretaries and teachers at the school level. We plan ahead to ensure there is sufficient time for documents to be translated before they are sent home. Teachers and secretaries at the school level 2018-19 CEP 71  Principal letters On-going through out the year Translation unit and Skedula Assistant Principal letters On-going through out the year Translation unit and Skedula 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night Parent teacher conferences September 26 November 29 and 30 March 7 and 8 Family Night May 9 IEP Meetings On-going through out the year interpretation service(s)? School secretaries provide interpretation services. We also use the over the phone interpretation services. School secretaries provide interpretation services. We also use the over the phone interpretation services. School secretaries provide interpretation services. We also use the over the phone interpretation services. Teachers, secretaries, and Assistant Principal provide interpretation. We also use the over the phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we communicate and reach limited-English-proficient families via School Messenger and Skedula. Messages are translated in the students home language. School staff and overt the phone interpretation services are used when needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff is informed of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the resources that are available via emails. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 72  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will include a language assistance services rights notification with mailings made by the Parent Coordinator. The school will post a notice in the main lobby of the office where translation and interpretation services can be obtained. The school will post the Parent Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will send a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. Surveys are translated in the limited-English-proficient parent home language. 2018-19 CEP 73 
