2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M600 School Name: THE HIGH SCHOOL OF FASHION INDUSTRIES Principal: DARYL BLANK 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The High School of Fashion Industries 02M600 310200011600 9-12 School Number (DBN): 225 West 24 th Street, New York, NY 10011 (212) 255-1235 (212) 255-4756 Phone Number: Fax: Daryl Blank dblank@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Email Address: Daryl Blank Jacqueline Perez Felicia Fann Danielle Silva Felicia Fann Kaitlyn Gurdyal Brianna Jones N/A District Information Vivien Orlen Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, 7th floor New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: VOrlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3880 Phone Number: 212-356-3880 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (718) 425-0516 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daryl Blank Jacqueline Perez Felicia Fann Pamela Rodriguez Felicia Fann Brianna Jones Kaitlyn Gurdyal Not Applicable Danielle Silva Justin Egan Tara Ricci *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MirnaDamian Yvonne Walker KatianaKalouf LashawnClark Eric Schwartzman Murielle Gousse Jack Jeffrey Not Applicable Not Applicable Member/ UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Mission of the High School of Fashion Industries is to provide challenging, creative and effective career, technical and academic training for New York City students. The faculty and administration of our school, working with the cooperation of the parents and student body, seek to provide a unique learning experience and a specially tailored program for all students who have an interest in a fashion related field. Our mission has several components: (1) To offer programs which provide every student with the opportunity to excel: academically, vocationally, 2018-19 CEP 9  technically and socially. (2) To foster skills and work habits, enabling students to succeed academically, mature socially, and develop physically, leading to success both during and after the high school experience. (3) To develop programs preparing students to be active and collaborative participants in a democratic multicultural society and a highly complex technological world. (4) To provide students with applicable hands-on learning experiences, encouraging the development of skills needed to succeed in the fashion industries and/or post-secondary educational experiences. (5) To devise programs that create applied learning experiences that merge academic and career skills, helping students see unity within the diversity of learning. (6) To strengthen ties with the business community, providing students access to the latest innovations and technological advances as well as to special enrichments and on-the-job training. (7) To foster professionalism and collaboration among the entire school community, drawing upon the unique talents and expertise of that community 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School of Fashion Industries (HSFI) is a Career and Technical Education school where students major in Fashion Design, Merchandising, Visual Display, or Graphics and Illustration in addition to taking their core academic subjects. HSFI is a Title I school where over 80% of our 1,750 students receive free or reduced lunch. With help from our corporate Advisory Board, most HSFI students participate in internships and experiences to gain real world insight into the fashion industry. Annually, the school year culminates in a series of student work celebrations including our fashion show, senior art show and International Center of Photography exhibit, with accompanying window displays. The connection to their CTE major and this variety of industry partnerships provide the added benefit of motivating our at-risk students to attend school regularly (we maintain a 91% attendance rate) and succeed in their academic classes. The school was originally founded as Central Needle Trades High School in a garment loft on West 26 th Street in 1926. Its original purpose was to provide a trained workforce for the many trades in fashion-related industries. Most of its students were immigrants or the children of immigrants who were trying to make better lives for themselves in a new country. Over the past 89 years, HSFI has continued to work to give our students opportunities for better lives. In 1926, this meant preparation to work in a garment center factory. Today it means access to college and a career where our students will be able succeed in the 21st century global economy. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately sixteen percent of the students have Individualized Education Plans with approximately 5% self-contained. As students move from 9th through 12th grade, they take an increasing number of classes within their major. As many as one-third of them continue to pursue these majors after graduation, moving on to colleges like FIT and Parsons. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. MOST PROGRESS – Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership & Supportive Environment An analysis of the 2017-18 'Framework for Great Schools' report indicates that HSFI has made the most progress in 'Supportive Environment' and Strong Family-Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 10  Strong Family-Community Ties Our strategic efforts to welcome our families into the school has contributed to the improvement of our framework element scores over the last three years – 2.72 in 2015 to 3.41 in 2016 to 4.09 in 2017 to 4.28 in 2018. Supportive Environment Our strategic efforts to create a welcoming environment to our school stakeholders has contributed to the improvement of our framework element scores over the last three years – 3.75 in 2016 to 3.67 in 2017 to hopefully a higher framework score in 2018 since we had 3.63 score on the survey element score. KEY FOCUS - Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction The feedback from our Superintendent's visits is that our school needs to focus on rigorous instruction with a focus on isolating race to address the performance gap of our black and latino boys. Connected to this focus is to develop a clear theory of action and comprehensive data driven needs assessment that results in improved teacher practice and student learning around rigor. An analysis of the 2018 'Framework for Great Schools' report indicates that HSFI is meeting standards with respect to Rigorous Instruction (3.94). 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M600 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1590 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 64 80 20 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 122 90 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 76.3% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 55.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.08 1% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 95% 89.1% 24.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 173 198 66 89.4% 6.3% 16.6% 33.2% 6.0% 1.1% 20 11% 8.7 N/A N/A 95% 95% 96.3% 29% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the ‘Framework for Great Schools’ report for the High School of Fashion Industries demonstrates that we are good at supporting students to pass classes and Regents, but we still need to work on college readiness which directly correlates with rigor. The gap between these two data points lends itself to a focus on working with staff on rigorous student tasks. The framework element data confirms the need for our school to focus on rigor – we scored 3.76 in 2015; 3.93 in 2016; 3.92 in 2017; and 3.94 in 2018. Our rigorous instruction scores have maintained steady, but need to improve. We need to address the achievement gap of our black and latino male population through targeted professional development around race and equity issues. The data aligns with our problem of practice which is 'There is inconsistency across classrooms in delivery of rigorous instruction that is “customized, inclusive and motivating.' Our theory of action in tackling this problem is ‘If we provide differentiated professional development for our teachers that focuses on building rigor, then student achievement will increase across sub-groups.' The action plan to get where we want to go includes targeted observation feedback and follow-up, peer observation opportunities, common planning and professional development to our teachers on specific strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will measure this by using our 'Rigorous Instruction' framework score. We will look for a 5% increase in the score which will go from 3.94 to 4.14 by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide differentiated professional development around lesson planning, questioning, assessment, differentiation and technology - this includes an intervisitation program focused on the school's problem of practice HSFI Teaching staff 9/2018 – 6/2019 ICT Teacher Team development Implementation of 'Writing Revolution' in 9th, 10th, 11th & 12th grades 'Response to Intervention' Plan-that creates an instructional program in the Science, Social Studies and Math departments where students not retaining content knowledge are provided individualized academic support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement HSFI ICT Teaching staff 9/2018 – 6/2019 9/2018 – 6/2019 9/2018 – 6/2019 Selected 9th, 10th & 11th grade teachers Students of varying academic success Principal, Instructional Assistant Principals and teacher team leaders Superintendent team, Principal, Instructional Assistant Principals and teacher team leaders Instructional Assistant Principals and teacher team leaders Instructional Assistant Principals, teacher team leaders, selected guidance staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our HSFI families with what we are doing around rigorous instruction by all means of communication and school outreach. The most crucial group to this engagement is our teaching staff. Curriculum maps, course outlines and our grading policy will be shared with families at the beginning of the school year. We plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see for themselves what goes on in the classroom. There will be ‘Parent Visitation Days’ in both the Fall and Spring term. One change to the school that we are hoping will support this engagement is the continued annualization of classes. Students will stay with the same teacher for the entire school year. Our belief is that this continuity will lend itself to teachers knowing students better as people and learners which we hope will foster greater rigor in classes. We employ an 2018-19 CEP 14  Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● ‘First Monday’ of the month schedule created through a School Based Option approved by the UFT staff and HSFI parents that allows for interdisciplinary teacher teams to meet ● Common preparation periods for core academic subjects allowing for department teacher teams to meet on a daily basis ● Per session hours for department and interdisciplinary teacher team leaders ● Funds devoted for Engage NY module copies and for the purchase of file folders & math notebooks for compiling student work; Funds for 'High Impact Partnership' with the Hochman Group / Writing Revolution Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will be analyzing academic performance for both general education and special education students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Scholarship data from STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of the ‘Framework for Great Schools’ survey element scores indicates that ‘Supportive Environment’ is 3.63. Our 'Supportive Environment' score is going in the upward direction after years of trending in the wrong direction - the score was 3.32 in 2015; 3.16 in 2016; 2.91 in 2017; and now up to 3.63. We believe that a school’s environment can never be too strong. There were response rates to a number of specific questions that reinforces the need to focus on developing a more 'Supportive Environment' - these questions included: In most or all of their classes at their school, their teachers support them when they are upset - 45% (up from 33%) In most or all of their classes at their school, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something - 51% (up from 42%) In most or all of their classes at their school, their teachers help them catch up if they are behind - 56% (up from 44%) In most or all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to come to school every day - 61% (up from 52%) In most or all of their classes at their school, most students think doing homework is important - 59% (up from 48%) The strength that our school has within this supportive environment framework is our PBIS system and the work we did around Social Emotional Learning during the 2017-18 school year. As a school we need to address race and equity issues head on to insure that our students of color feel listened to and their needs are being met. We need to keep building on the strength of our current systems to improve our school environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will the NYC DOE ‘Framework for Great Schools’ element survey report - ‘Supportive Environment’ category - our goal is a a 5% increase to 3.81 by June 2019. . 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development plan designed to isolate the impact of race on equity at the High School of Fashion Industries - using Harvard University’s ‘Reimagining Integration’ work to guide our efforts All HSFI staff 9/2018 – 6/2019 Implementation of Positive Behavior Interventions & Supports (PBIS) system – Tier 2 System of Student Supports. New parts of this Tier 2 system includes 'Student Ambassadors' that are trained and then mentor 'at-risk' peers & 'Peer Conflict Mediators' that are trained and help resolve student conflicts. Supports that will continue include Staff Mentoring & Restorative Circles for identified students; Peer Mentoring of Targeted 9 th Graders using the Peer Group Connection program who have data points trending towards a difficult transition to high school; Academic Intervention Services; Peer Mentoring Program that uses National Honor Society students to tutor and mentor at-risk students. Implement Year 3 of HSFI's partnership with Yale University's Center for Emotional Intelligence and partner with the psychology department at Long Island University - Brooklyn to action plan with two goals in mind: (1) Directly supporting 'at-risk' tier two 10th graders; and (2) Engaging the entire HSFI staff on teaching strategies to develop social-emotional intelligence in students 9/2018 – 6/2019 Identified HSFI students - 15-20% of students 9/2018 – 6/2019 Identified HSFI tier two 10th graders; HSFI teaching staff HSFI Equity Team consisting of Principal, selected Assistant Principals, counselors, teachers, student and family volunteers Assistant Principals of Guidance and Safety/Security; Teacher serving as Mentoring Coordinator; Teacher serving as Restorative Justice Coordinator; Teacher serving as National Honor Society Coordinator 'PBIS Executive Board' consisting of Principal, Assistant Principals and teacher volunteers; LIU-Brooklyn faculty N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our HSFI families with what we are doing around the development of a supportive environment by all means of communication and school outreach. We plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see for themselves what goes on in the classroom and our school 2018-19 CEP 17  environment. There will be ‘Parent Visitation Days’ in both the Fall and Spring term. One change to the school this past year that proved to have a positive impact to support an improved school culture is the annualization of classes. Students will stay with the same teacher for the entire school year. Our belief is that this continuity will lend itself to teachers knowing students better as people and learners which we hope will foster a more supportive and engaging culture. We employ an Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Partnership with Yale University Center for Emotional Intelligence, LIU-Brooklyn psychology department & Facebook inspirED ● Student Activities and student government led activities – per session for 30+ clubs and activities (academic and CTE related); compensatory time for Coordinator of Student Activities ● Peer Group Connection program through The Center for Supportive Schools – funds for training; teaching periods to train peer mentors ● Mentoring Coordinator compensatory time position plus per session for staff mentors ● Restorative Justice Coordinator compensatory time position – teaching periods devoted to Restorative Justice class for selected students ● Harvard University’s ‘Reimagining Integration’ work to guide our efforts. The ABCDs of ‘Reimagining Integration’ are: Academics - All students have strong academic preparation, capitalizing on and connecting to students of all backgrounds, with high levels of knowledge and skills Belonging - All students have a strong sense and appreciation of their own culture and heritage, as well as of those of their diverse classmates Commitment to dismantling racism and oppression - All students understand the role that institutional racism and other forms or oppression play in our society and have the skills, vision, and courage to dismantle them Diversity - All students appreciate and value different perspectives, thoughts, and people and have friendships and collaborative working relationships with students and adults from different racial and economic backgrounds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will engage in internal school surveys throughout the school year to assess the impact of our action plan on the supportive environment of the school 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYC DOE 'Framework for Great Schools' Supportive Environment element score Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the ‘Framework for Great Schools’ report for the High School of Fashion Industries demonstrates that we are a collaborative faculty. Our framework element scores confirms the collaborative culture – we scored 4.51 in 2016; 4.46 in 2017; and 4.26 in 2018. We are exceeding standards in this framework area, but the element score was lower than the previous year, which is concerning. Our collaborative efforts are focusing on improving the rigor of our instruction. We need to address the achievement gap of our black and latino males through targeted professional development around race and equity issues. In addition, we have a performance gap with our students with disabilities and therefore, we must address the differentiation of this rigorous instruction. The data aligns with our problem of practice which is 'There is inconsistency across classrooms in delivery of rigorous instruction that is “customized, inclusive and motivating.' Our theory of action in tackling this problem is ‘If we provide differentiated professional development for our teachers that focuses on building rigor, then student achievement will increase across sub-groups.' The action plan to get where we want to go includes targeted observation feedback and follow-up, peer observation opportunities, common planning and professional development to our teachers on specific strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will measure this by using our 'Collaborative Teachers' framework score. We will look for a 5% increase in the score which will go from 4.29 to 4.51 by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Core academic departments being programmed for a common preparation period to meet in grade level teams daily that share best practices around the school's problem of practice Core academic dept. staff 9/2018 - 6/2019 Once a month on 'First Mondays,' students will be dismissed early so staff can meet in interdisciplinary teams focused on developing specific pedagogical strategies with target students in mind Core academic dept. staff 9/2018 - 6/2019 Monthly teams of teachers participate in intervisitations that are combined with the development of a lesson plan by the team Core academic dept. staff 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teacher leaders of grade level teams; Instructional Assistant Principals Teacher leaders of grade level teams; Instructional Assistant Principals Teacher leaders of grade level teams; Instructional Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our HSFI families with what we are doing around the development of collaborative teachers by all means of communication and school outreach. Our communications checklist includes the use of School Messenger (emails and calls); Jupiter Grades; Social Media (including Facebook & Twitter); and our public website. We plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see how our teachers collaborate. There will be ‘Parent Visitation Days’ in both the Fall and Spring term. We employ an Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Core academic departments being programmed for a common preparation period to meet in grade level  teams daily SBO vote to schedule 'First Mondays' of each month where students will be dismissed early so staff can meet in interdisciplinary Professional Learning Communities focused on developing specific pedagogical strategies with target students in mind 2018-19 CEP 21   Per session for teacher leaders to organize, execute and reflect daily grade level teams and interdisciplinary Professional Learning Communities  Per session for ICT teacher teams to meet and plan together in the development of lesson plans with SWDs in mind Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will examine the academic success of our target population after each school marking period to assess the how successful our teacher teams are impacting our target students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYC DOE 'Framework for Great Schools' Supportive Environment element score Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the ‘Framework for Great Schools’ report for the High School of Fashion Industries demonstrates effective school leadership. The framework element data confirms this leadership, but there is concern considering the element score went down for the 2017-18 school year. We scored 4.34 in 2016; 4.30 in 2017; and 3.83 in 2018. We need to be reflective of the 2017-18 school year to help determine the cause(s) of the drop. A significant piece of our leadership for the upcoming school year will be our ability to lead our staff to improve the level of rigorous instruction. The supervisory leadership must address the achievement gap of our black and latino male population along with the performance gap with our SWDs. Our students and staff must believe that the school leadership is listening to them and then following through on our collective action plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will measure this by using our 'Effective School Leadership' framework score. We will look for a 5% increase in the score which will go from 3.83 to 4.02 by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct student and staff town halls throughout the 2018-19 school year to listen to ideas and suggestions to improve all aspects of the school Communicate the school's Strategic Instructional Action Plan (SIAP) to all HSFI stakeholders at the beginning of the school year and continue to monitor/communicate about the SIAP HSFI staff and students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal HSFI students, staff and families 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal; Assistant Principals; School Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our HSFI families with what we are doing around the development of effective school leadership by all means of communication and school outreach. Our communications checklist includes the use of School Messenger (emails and calls); Jupiter Grades; Social Media (including Facebook & Twitter); and our public website. We plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see how our teachers collaborate. There will be ‘Parent Visitation Days’ in both the Fall and Spring term. We employ an Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Schedule student and staff town halls throughout the school year Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor and adjust the school's Strategic Instructional Action Plan in consultation with all school stakeholders on a monthly basis with students and staff at town halls and with families at monthly parent meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYC DOE 'Framework for Great Schools' Effective School Leadership element score Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the ‘Framework for Great Schools’ report for the High School of Fashion Industries demonstrates that we making excellent progress with respect to strong family and community ties. We work hard and thoughtfully at communicating with HSFI families with the goal of wanting them to know everything that goes on in the school. The framework element data confirms the improvement – we scored 3.41 in 2016; 4.09 in 2017; and 4.28 in 2018. The plan is to keep doing what we are doing while always looking for ways to improve. A strong indicator of these family and community is an all-time high of 36% of Fashion families did the Learning Environment Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will measure this by using our 'Strong Family-Community Ties' framework score. We will look for a 5% increase in the score which will go from 4.28 to 4.49 by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our communications checklist includes the use of School Messenger (emails and calls); Jupiter Grades; Social Media (including Facebook & Twitter); and our public website Plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see how our teachers collaborate Employ an Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? HSFI Families 9/2018 - 6/2019 Assistant Principal of Family Engagement HSFI Families 9/2018 - 6/2019 Assistant Principal of Family Engagement HSFI Families 9/2018 - 6/2019 Assistant Principal of Family Engagement N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We invest in our communication with our families to insure they are aware of how we implement the 'Framework for Great Schools.' Our communications checklist includes the use of School Messenger (emails and calls); Jupiter Grades; Social Media (including Facebook & Twitter); and our public website. We plan to continue ‘HSFI Parent Visitation Day’ where our families are invited into the school to observe classes and see how our teachers collaborate. There will be ‘Parent Visitation Days’ in both the Fall and Spring term. We employ an Assistant Principal whose job focus is 'Family Engagement' - this AP maintains strong communication with our Fashion families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will examine the success of our outreach to our families by always asking for feedback when parents visit the school and through school produced surveys Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYC DOE 'Framework for Great Schools' Strong Family-Community Ties element score Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8 th grade test scores; HSFI Credit accumulation; Regents performance; Teacher / Counselor recommendations 8 th grade test scores; HSFI Credit accumulation; Regents performance; Teacher / Counselor recommendations 8 th grade test scores; HSFI Credit accumulation; Regents performance; Teacher / Counselor recommendations 8 th grade test scores; HSFI Credit accumulation; Regents performance; Teacher / Counselor recommendations Teacher / Guidance / Deans referrals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring; Students involved in reading and writing activities connected to ELA curriculum Tutoring; Students involved in mathematical problem solving connected to Algebra, Geometry and Trigonometry curriculums Tutoring; Students involved in reading and writing activities connected to Science curriculum Tutoring; Students involved in reading and writing activities connected to Global and US History curriculums Counseling; Functional Behavioral Assessments & Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group review sessions. College Essay: one-on-one After-school and Saturdays Small groups and one-to-one; Peer tutoring During & After school and Saturdays Tutoring in small groups; Peer tutoring Before & After school During school, After school and Online Small group, in the classroom, one-to-one and tutoring and through digital means One-to-one and small groups During and after the school day 2018-19 CEP 29  Behavior Intervention Plans 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 77 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, School Supplies, Transportation support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The High School of Fashion Industries has an excellent record of retaining highly qualified teachers which translates into consistency and stability for students. The school offers financial reimbursement as outlined by Title 1 guidelines for teachers who enrolled in educational programs to become highly qualified. The school will offer mentoring to all eligible teachers. Scientific research has shown that a school that implements ‘Positive Behavior Interventions and Support’ (PBIS), like the High School of Fashion Industries, has higher rates of staff retention than schools that do not follow this model. This is the school’s fifth year with the PBIS model. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Organize school schedule to include ‘First Mondays’ where staff has common planning time to meet across grade levels in Professional Learning Communities devoted to this goal and common professional development centered on the Common Core Standards. Teachers in these Professional Learning Communities will focus on working with students on a monthly skill that will contribute towards meeting the New York City Department of Education instructional expectations aligned with the Common Core Standards. The monthly skills are monitored by teachers for students in each content area through the ongoing collection of student work in folders and notebooks along with the diagnostic test administered at the beginning and end of the school year. Individual students that are challenged by specific skill areas will identified in the Professional Learning Communities so teachers can share best practices for supporting these students including tutoring and differentiated grouping. Organize school schedule to include common planning time for academic departments to meet on developing best practices in alignment with the Common Core Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 33  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The team of supervisors and teacher leaders who analyzed the New York City Department of Education instructional expectations alongside the Common Core State Standards, who developed the school’s 10 month skills plan, will be the core group that decides on the assessments that students are evaluated on. The supervisors and teacher team leaders will meet with the staff of their respective department and grade team to gain input on assessment creation and analysis. As per NY State Department of Education regulations teachers and supervisors were involved in the Measures of Student Learning decisions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 34  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 955,245.00 0 12,366.00 0 9,855,070.00 X N/A x N/A X X N/A X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 35  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School of Fashion Industries, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School of Fashion Industries will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School of Fashion Industries in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 39  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 41  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 41 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have an after-school ENL program conducted by two teachers at a time--one ENL and one content-teacher. (The teachers will be programmed from a group of three ENL, two content area teachers.) The teaching model will be team-teaching. The academy will take place in one classroom, with on average, 15 - 20 students with two teachers at each session--one ENL and one content teacher. Because we have a small ELL population, we will differentiate in the same classroom for students working on Global and/or Living Environment. The computer-based program we will use supports this differentiation. The Title III ENL/Global program meets on Tuesdays from 3 :00 - 3:45 PM and 3:50- 4:40 PM for 30 sessions from October 16, 2018 to June 4, 2019. This class is taught by ENL teachers Drabman & Mokim and Global teacher Varrichio. We are a multi-session school, so the same class repeats each day offered to maximize availability. The Title III ENL/Living Environment program meets on Thursdays from 3 :00 - 3:45 PM and 3:50- 4:40 PM for 30 sessions from October 18, 2018 to June 13, 2019. This class is taught by ENL teacher Bohner & Mokim and Living Environment teacher De La Rosa. We are a multi-session school, so the same class repeats each day offered to maximize availability. Raitionale: We will specifically target instruction in the core subjects of Global History and Living Environment and focus on helping ELLs both to develop Tier 3 vocabulary in these content areas and to give students a chance to go deeper in their study of themes and topics that they struggle with as identified by their content teachers. This enrichment program focuses on increasing achievement in these content areas and developing Academic English to improve students' oratory skills, academic writing, and accessing difficult tests. The data analysis involved examining student Regents scores for ELLs. According to the NYS Report Card, only 18% of our ELLS passed the Global Regents compared to over 74% of the total population. Last year zero passed on their first attempt; the majority take the exam at least three times before passing. The Social Studies department and the ENL teachers believe that the biggest obstacle is the students' limited tier 2 and 3 vocabulary. Also according to the NYS Report Card, 45% on ELLs passed the Living Environment Regents on the first try compared to over 78% of the general population. While their is greater success on this exam, it often comes after multiple tries. Again, a concern of the science teachers and ENL teachers was students' limited vocabulary. Students served (subgroups and grade levels): We will focus on the Transitioning and Expanding subgroups (we have no Entering or Emerging students this year). More specifically: 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 9th graders preparing for the Living Environment Regents who enter reading below grade level All 10th graders preparing for the Global Regents 11th and 12th-graders who are repeaters for one or both of the exams To facilitate this learning while making the program fun and engaging, we will continue to utilize an online resource: Brainpop. Brainpop has engaging videos and educational games on many of the topics and themes we want to emphasize. The system allows the teachers to track students progress and understanding and offer necessary support. This will give us an opportunity to differentiate instruction based on both the grades and needs of our ELLs. For example, with our 9th-graders (almost 50% of our current ELLs), we will focus on topics and vocabulary aligned with Living Environment and the first year of Global History. For the older students we will base the topics on areas of struggle on Regents exams they have taken and failed the first time. Using Chromebooks, students will use Brainpop and other online resources to create virtual visual glossaries of Tier 3 vocabulary. As a culminating project, they will then share these glossaries with all the students in Global or Living Environment to use as a resource. This is separate from the work done during regular instructional day, but will provide enrichment and support for this work. Language of Instruction: Instruction will be provided in English. two of the teachers can provide additional support in Spanish by providing resources as part of the ENL program The program does not require a supervisor as the school has a rotating assigned supervisor during the hours of the activity. There will therefore, be no cost to Title III. We will use Title III funds ($1500) to purchase five Chromebooks so that each student can work on one for Title III instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: vocabulary Rationale: Topic: How can we use technology to support our ELLS? Problem of practice: Our ELLS take and fail the Global History Regents multiple times. The same is true to a lesser extent for Living Environment. The also are low scorers on the Reading/Writing portion of the SAT which leads to fewer college opportunities. Theory of Action: If we help student build Tier 3 vocabulary in these subject areas through the use of technology like Brainpop, our percent of ELLS passing these exams on the first attempt would increase by 15%. If we help students increase Tier 2 vocabulary it would help their performance on Regents, but also on the Reading/Writing portion of the SAT leading to a 10% increase in the number of ELLs who score a 480 or above. Action Plan 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development Use technology to give students multiple entry points to key topics. Sites like Brainpop make some difficult concepts clear and memorable. Use to technology to help develop Tier 3 vocabulary, With the use of Chromebooks, students will produce visual glossaries to share with their classmates. Participants: Five teachers--three ENL teachers and two content area teachers. THey will be paid per session through Title III funds Schedule: Meeting will take place the first Monday of every month for seven 45 min. sessions* from October 2018 to April 2019 from 3:20 - 3: 55 PM after PLCs (*Oct 1, Nov 5, Dec. 3, Jan. 7, Feb. 4, March 4, April 1). Title III Cost: per session hours (approximately $1237) Topics to be covered: Al topics are ELL-focused and relate to how to use Brainpop as a vocabulary-enrichment tool as well as how to best help ELLs acquire vocabulary. And training and monitoring results on Khan Academy program. Meeting 1: -Discuss/Plan beginning of year parent gathering to introduce parents to Brainpop and Jupiter Grades. -Evaluate Brainpop and organize which Brainpop units we’ll be using Semester 1. -Create Google Classroom for all ESL students -Set up Khan Academy classroom Meeting 2: Look at http://practicaledtech.com/free-handbook/ Review preliminary Khan Academy progress. Meeting 3 and 4: Look at Global Regents for vocabulary and concepts, Skim “Best ofs” for Social studies, specifically http://larryferlazzo.edublogs.org/2008/05/17/the-best-websites-for-teaching-learning-about-world-history/ http://larryferlazzo.edublogs.org/2008/06/08/the-best-websites-for-teaching-learning-about-us-history/ Review Khan Academy progress Meeting 5 and 6: Look at Living Environment Regents for vocabulary and concepts, Skim “Best ofs” for Living Environment. http://larryferlazzo.edublogs.org/2010/03/12/the-best-sites-for-learning-about-human-evolution/ http://larryferlazzo.edublogs.org/2010/05/22/the-best-resources-for-world-biodiversity-day-endangered-species-day/ Review Khan Academy progress Meeting 7: Discuss how we’re going to disseminate culminating work, discuss end of year multi-cultural party for ESL students/parents (students will be presenting their work to parents) 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Provider: self-guided with online resources, including video resources for Brainpop Agendas and minutes will be maintained via the school's Google Drive account by participants. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We historically have very low turnout by parents of ELLs to parent events. We theorize that a parent my feel overwhelmed or unsure, especially when a large event. To combat this, we will hold an ELL parent reception before each Parent Association meeting. this will be an opportunity for parents to meet with an ENL/Spanish teacher in a small group setting to get a preview of the topic to be discussed at the Parent Association meeting and how it relates specifically to their child as an ELL. The parent will also be introduced to a translator who will assist them after during the full meeting. Schedule and Duration: The Title III support will be provided from 5 - 5:45 PM on the nine dates listed below (Wednesdays, once a month). Topics: Listed below Name of provider: an ESL/Spanish teacher will conduct the Title III orientation sessions. (An organization called Big Word will provide translators for the general meetings conducted by our AP Parent Engagement, Danielle Silva.) Notification will be made through School Messenger in the parents' home language and through letters mailed home. Dates and Topics: Parent Communication Seminar/ Sept. 26, 2018 The goal of this event is introduce to parents our school communications systems; such as the HSFI website, blog, school messenger, NYC schools account, and Jupiter grades and how to access them. The school communication presentation will take place at the very first PA meeting of the year. The first PA meeting is well attended especially by 9th grade parents. This is an opportune time to walk parents through on how they can access information about their child, school events, college news, and scholarships. Parents will also be provided with the contact information of D. Silva if they have questions or concerns. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with ways to communicate with the school and monitor their child's progress. Financial Aid Workshop/ October 17, 2018 Partner Hudson Guild The goal is to educate HSFI parents and students about the College Financial Aid process specifically FAFSA. A representative from Hudson Guild will educate parents step by step on the College Financial Aid process. There will be a Q&A at the end of the workshop. FAFSA will be available in October for Seniors to fill out specifically during their College APPS classes. From the information presented at this workshop D. Silva will put a PowerPoint to share with all Seniors in the College APPS classes. This meets the needs of ELL parents by giving them access to ways to finance college. College Writing Workshop/ November 14 Partner Hudson Guild The goal is to introduce the college essay writing process specifically to 9-11 grades and their parents. This will also be an opportune event for 12th graders to receive feedback on the college essay drafts. A representative from Hudson Guild will work with families during this event. From the information presented at this workshop D. Silva will put a PowerPoint to share with all Seniors in the College APPS classes. This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with what is expected of their child as he/her applies to college. Summer Youth Employment/ Job for Teens/January 16 The goal is to educate parents about the Summer Youth Employment program and how to help support their teen in search for a summer job. A representative from the Summer Youth employment will inform families about what type of job opportunities are available to students, ages 14-18 years of age. D.Silva will also present and provide information on how to obtain working papers. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with what is expected of their child as he/her applies for work. Cyberbullying Workshop (tentative date December 19) The goal is to present to parents the effects, consequences, signs and preventative strategies in relation to cyberbullying. Former DOE Level II will talk with parents about all aspects of bullying including cyberbullying. D. Silva will summarize information presented at this workshop for distribution during New Student orientation in June including which faculty member to contact in the case that a student is being bullied. This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with problems their child may encounter and how to work with the school to help. Peer Group Connection Workshop/ February, 13 Center for Supportive Schools. The goal is to familiarize our families with the peer group connection program offered to our 9th graders and mentorship/leadership class offered to 11th & 12th graders. E. Feil, PGC Coordinator and Peer Group Connection leaders (grades11 &12) will demonstrate to families different activities that take place during the 9th grade PCG class. This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with support available for their child. Dream Act Workshop/ March13 HSFI Alumni Association The goal is to educate HSFI parents and students about postsecondary opportunities for undocumented students. A speaker sponsored by the HSFI Alumni Association will inform parents on how undocumented students can apply and pay for college. D.Silva will also follow up along with guidance staff by connecting with families that attend workshop through one on one conferences. This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with possible issues connected to immigration status 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Testing Workshop/May 15 The goal to familiarize families specifically parents and guardians with what to expect during Common Core/Regents testing. J.Egan will do an extensive presentation on how parents can prepare their children for Regents/Common Core testing in June. This meets the needs of ELL parents by familiarizing them with what is expected of their child during high stakes exams Parent Association and Title I planning for the 2019 -20 school year/June 19 The goal is to hold a roundtable event to brainstorm ideas for upcoming family engagement workshops and conferences for 2017-18 school year. Or the upcoming school year. The PA Executive Board of 2017-18 will present ideas to participating families on workshops and presentations. All HSFI families will be encouraged to attend and give input to help plan a diverse menu of activities for the upcoming school year. This meets the needs of ELL parents by giving them a voice in how the school works to support their child. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name HS of Fashion Industries Borough Manhattan School Number 600 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Daryl Blank Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Zalykha Mokim Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Bohner /ELA Teacher/Subject Area Hally Drabman /ELA Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Nancy Moore Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Sandra Guzman Parent Coordinator Danielle Silva Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1622 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 49 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.02%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We assess student reading and writing at the beginning of each semester with a Writing Revolution (TWR) writing task and rubric (9th and 10th grades) or CCSS task and rubric (11th and 12th grades). Teachers look at the data and student work in weekly focus groups to identify trends and discuss strategies to target instruction. From this we determined that we need to use graphic organizers and a note-taking system (TWR Single and Multi Paragraph Outlines) and teachers have focused on previewing Tier 2 vocabulary before reading. We have also continue to create tiered questions to correspond with the Engage NY curriculum we use to provide multiple entry points to the texts for students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teachers meet with the ELA teachers of the same grade once a week to align instruction and look closely at target student work. A newly-hired ENL teachers will receive four days of TWR intensive instruction to support writing. Additionally, we look at ENL student work across departments by grade once a month in PLCs to align supports across content areas. Also 2018-19 CEP 54  once a month, the ENL teachers meet once a month after school to review ways to use technology to support instruction for ENL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate success in student progress on the NYSESLAT as well as credit accumulation and Regents pass rate. We did meet AYP for ELLs last year. In addition, we measure writing progress through a TWR writing sample administered at the beginning, middle and end of year. We compile monthly writing tasks for ELLs that are retained in a folder for all four years so that each year the new teacher can review a students writing and progression right from day one. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the start of each term/year the new teacher reviews each students work to measure progress and plan for differentiation. Specifically, at the start on 2018-10 school year, the ENL teachers will meet with all current data NYSESLAT, Regents scores and the writing folder to determine individual needs. These can then be addressed quickly through flexible grouping, tiered questions and tasks and leveled texts. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a grade 9-12 school. However, we do have a RTI program that includes ELLs for Math, Science and Social Studies. Students take a weekly common assessment. Those who do not meet set benchmarks can attend an after school intensive remediation session and are retested. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on NYSESLAT results, it is clear that ELLs need the most help on Reading and Writing. We also see evidence of this from the CC ELA Regents. Our ELLs struggle particulary with organizing and writing the Argument Essay. These skills are emphasized in both the free-standing classrooms and the Title III after-school academy. Based on this, we adopted schoolwide use of The Writing Revolution program, beginning a High-Impact Partnership in 2016. We are still early in the process, but have seen positive results in terms of ELLs writing more complex sentences and including more detail in written responses. We also support our Native Spanish-speakers by offering two levels of NLA Spanish to build reading and writing skills in Spanish through rigorous study of literature and research projects. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We are in the process of developing a data bank of student information that a teacher, guidance counselor, etc can access in one place to see how a student, including an ELL, is doing in terms of credits and Regents, as well as social-emotional or disciplinary issues that may be impacting performance. Currently, all teachers can also see their students grades from other teachers through Jupiter Grades. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We will have two standalone ENL classes--one each for grade 9 and 10 grade. These are organized by grade and mostly comprised of Expanding students as well as our three Transitioning students (We currently have no 2018-19 CEP 55  Entering or Emerging students). We have Integrated ENL for each grade 9- 12 for Commanding students. All standalone classes and Integrated ELA classes are taught by teachers licensed in ENL/ELA b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have three teachers dual licensed in ELA/ENL so that we can offer the following: Entering-- 180 minutes/week of standalone ENL taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA taught by a ENL/ELA licensed teacher, and 180 minutes a week with an ENL teacher pushing in to a Content Area class. Emerging-- 180 minutes/week of standalone ENL taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. Transitioning-- 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. Expanding-- 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. Commanding-- 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA taught by one of our ELA/ENL licensed teachers. Our AP of ELA/ENL reviews the NYSESLAT results for existing and incoming students and then works with the programmer to insure students are programmed are served for the number of minutes mandated. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Teachers are part of a joint department with the ELA teachers and all three are dual-licensed in ELA. They plan and attend professional development together and with the ELA Department as a whole. The curriculum for the ENL classes mirrors the content and the rigor of the Common Core-aligned ELA program as is based on the NY State Engage NY Curriculum modules as well The Writing Revolution program. In the Integrated model classes, the lessons mirrors the curriculum of the corresponding ELA course. For example, a lesson may focus on a particular essay or research project, but the teachers scaffold the information to help the students build academic language. Teachers also emphasize spoken language skills by having students work cooperatively in groups and prepare oral presentations. In the standalone ENL, each day the teachers emphasize skills that bridge to other academic subjects. For example, a teacher may plan a unit on reading and writing about issues relating to the study of the natural world or use other related informational text. We've expanded The Writing Revolution to Math, Science, Social Studies and CTE classes so that we can meet the ELLs language needs with a common approach across content area. Teachers from all content areas meet within and across departments around the use of The Writing Revolution and we share a month-by-month skill plan. The skills reinforced through The Writing Revolution help students become stronger writers and readers which helps them meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards. In addition to these classes, through our Title III funding we have an ENL Academy after school run by ENL teachers, and a 2018-19 CEP 56  bilingual Science teacher and Social Studies teacher. We support the ELLs performance in Regents and Common Core exams both through class instruction and the After-School ENL Academy. Here we provide assistance with English skills--specifically writing support. In addition, we provide ongoing subject-specific tutoring leading up to each major exam. In the ninth-grade, we offer two different levels of Spanish Language for Native speakers. In these classes, Spanish-speaking students have the opportunity to improve their skills in their Native Language. School staff helps ELLs transition from middle school to high school through the Spanish-Bilingual Admissions Director. The 9th-grade ENL Teacher conducts a two-week series of orientation lessons in the ESL class at the beginning of September. This year, we are continuing to focus on using the strategies from Writing Revolution with the ELLs. All of the ENL teachers attended four days of training last year and got specific in-class feedback from TWR trainers. They will attend a refresher this year. The work is focused on helping students understand the structure of academic language to become better academic readers and writers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated for support services and other needs by our guidance staff. We have both bilingual Chinese and Spanish personnel. 87% of our ELLs are Spanish-Speaking. As 9th graders, they are programmed in a Heritage Language of Native Language Spanish class to build their literacy skills in Spanish as well. All ELLs and those who have tested out in the past two years have the option to read and/or write their Regents exams in their native language and to use bilingual glossaries as mandated by NY State. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The AP Language Arts, Nancy Moore, evaluates the records of incoming ELLs to identify to ensure proper placement and identify any SIFE students. The guidance counselors will meet with the SIFE students once a month to provide extra counseling and support. With the support of the ENL teacher, the students are encouraged to attend the After-School ENL academy-held twice a week. The ENL teacher differentiates instruction in the classroom to meet the needs of the student both through formative assessment and adjustment of curriculum and the use of tiered questions to offer multiple entry points to the Common Core -aligned curriculum. b. A newcomer is buddied up in the classroom with a student who speaks the same language to help him or her make a comfortable transition to high school. All newcomers are placed in small stand-alone ENL classes that meets twice a day. taught by licensed-ENL teachers. The classrooms have classroom libraries to give students the opportunity to read independently in their own language. In addition, students are encourages to attend the twice a week ENL Academy After School and the once a week Native Language Academy. c. All developing ELLs are programmed based on their NYSESLAT results. In either stand-alone or Integrated classrooms, the teachers differentiate based on formative assessment to meet the students' needs. In addition they can attend the after-school ENL Academy. d. Approximately 38% of our ELLS are long-term; 83% of these are Special Needs students with learning disabilities. The are served based on their IEPs by our Instructional Support Services Department. In addition, students are encouraged to attend the twice a week ENL Academy for extra support. We also have peer-tutoring daily after-school for additional support. Starting in 2016- 17, we adopted a schoolwide use of the Writing Revolution program to support students like our long-term ELLS to become stronger academic readers and writers. 2018-19 CEP 57  e. Former ELLs are programmed in an integrated ELA class. They are also encourage to attend the after-school ENL Academy. Finally, they receive testing modification on Regents exams, such as the use of glossaries as mandated by NY State. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In addition to serving these students through the ENL program, there is content-specific tutoring available after-school and use of a computer lab. Also, testing is conducted in the student’s native language and Spanish-speaking students receive counseling by a licensed bilingual Social Worker. Our bilingual ERSSA Social Worker also provides additional support. Once identified, these students are tracked from grades 9 through 12 and referred to available tutoring programs (in each subject area), before, during, and after school as well as the ENL Academy. Additional support is provided by a bilingual para-professional in subject area classes, and reference materials are also available in the student’s native language. In addition, teachers support students with graphic organizers and tiered assignments to differentiate instruction. The ENL and Special Education teachers work together in grade level focus groups each week to develop differentiated curriculum support. These materials facilitate students accessing the curriculum at multiple entry points. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We serve all ELLs as required by CR Part 154. We currently have no Entering or Emerging ELLs. Our Transitioning students (all ninth-graders currently) receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and 180 minutes of Standalone ENL. This exceeds the minimum required minutes, but we find the double period model allows us to support these students at the start of their high school career. Our Expanding students are served through 180 minutes/week of Integrated ENL. To support our ELLs-SWDs, do more intensive preparation for the NYSESLAT. Some of our students are not good standardized test-takers. By familiarizing them with the construction of the test, this will reduced anxiety and help us get a better reading of their abilities. AP Special Education, Brienne McGuinness, , ensures we follow IEP mandates regarding meeting programming requirements and accommodations per each ELL-SWD and recommended management needs to address learning delays in the least restrictive learning environment. Additionally, our Commanding students all move to an Intergated ENL class that is team-taught by a teacher with an ELA and ENL license and one with a Special Ed ELA licence to ensure we are meeting the needs of the ELL-SWDs per their needs per their IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Though we don’t have a formal Bilingual program, our Spanish-speaking ELLs are programmed in a class with Spanish-speaking teachers in Math, Social Studies and Science when possible. In their stand-alone ENL classes, students receive the same materials and preparation as the general population but review the material with language support, including a bilingual glossary in math. For example, our bilingual Social Studies teachers use multiple instructional approaches and methods including: reading aloud, visuals, multimedia including film, audio recordings and PowerPoint presentations. The curriculum is generally taught at a modified pace as compared to the general population. Various assessments (both formal and informal) are given in order to determine the level of comprehension before a new topic is started. In science, we offer each test/quiz in both English and Spanish for ELL Spanish students. Students are also allowed to turn in projects in Spanish (ie: labeling cell diagrams in Spanish). Teachers regularly meet with ELL trained teachers to determine modules of instruction that help ELL learners. Tutoring available in Spanish for science. We have several different instructional materials for our ELL students including: Spanish textbooks, glossaries, and handouts that are modified for ELL students. These materials are distributed at the teacher’s discretion. We continue to expand this area. 2018-19 CEP 58  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1. Continued expansion of The Writing Revolution program to support 9th, 10th and 11th grade students across content areas to become stronger readers and writers. This year we have also begun training our CTE teachers so that student get exposure to writing skills instruction throughout the day. 2. Community-based Health Center that offers a full range of medical, vision, dental and mental health services on location at the school. 3. Schoolwide approach to Social Emotional Learning to develop the "whole" student, especially those who struggle with academic success like our ELL/SWDs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in a full range of Extra-Curricular Activities in addition to the ENL Academy. This year, the ENL Academy will focus on developing writing skills. we'll use the strategies learned from The Writing Revolution PD to help students build writing stamina as well as attending to the specifics of grammar and conventions. ELLs receive information about the ENL Academy through letters to parents, electronic communication through Jupiter and fliers. They learn of other extracurricular opportunities at a club fair at the start of each semester as well as from our school website and daily announcements and emails. We are centrally tracking student participation in after-school activities so we can better track participation by all sub-groups, including ELLs. Club Name Meeting Room Meeting Day Accessories Club 719 Thursday Adopt A Student Student Lounge, Library, 625 Wednesday American Red Cross 906 Friday Anti-Bullying 323 Tuesday Charles Nolan Fashion Club 504 Wednesday cheer gym Wednesday Chit Chat Club 501* Library M-F CoOp 625 Tuesday Cosmetology 721 Tuesday Dance Team auditorium/10th floor gym/cafeteria Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday DECA 625 or College Office Tuesday Fashion Forecasting Club 927 Tuesday Fashion With A Purpose 621 Wednesday FIT/Fashion illustration 744 Tuesday French 323 Tuesday Glee 323 Wednesday HSFI Animal Welfare 227 Friday HSFI Step Team 4th FL Cafeteria Mon-Tues I Mag 319 Wednesday Knitting Club 219 Wednesday Lincoln-Douglas Debate team 725 Monday MOS 901 Monday National Honor Society Auditorium/925 Wednesday PBIS PBIS Store Friday 2018-19 CEP 59  Photography Club 243 Tuesday Publications 925/943 Tuesday, when on deadline more days throughout the week RIF RAF Book Club 225 Wednesday Skills USA 721 Thursday Stylist Club 719 Tuesday Tailoring Club 626 Tuesday 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have several different instructional materials for our ELL students including: Spanish textbooks, glossaries, and handouts that are modified for ELL students. These materials are distributed at the teacher’s discretion for the purpose of providing multiple entry points to the CCSS curriculum. We also have a classroom Chromebooks to allow students to use computers in class. Our ENL Classrooms have Smartboards. We continue to expand this area. In Science (specifically in Living Environment), the students create their own vocabulary flashcards. They are allowed to use translations and/or definitions. They are encouraged to use the cards during in class and homework activities. In Earth Science, Living Environment and Elective courses, some of the TWR handouts are differentiated with tier II and at times tier III vocabulary. For Math and Global and US History, resources used from Engage NY provide scaffolds specifically designed for New York State. These resources are aligned to the CCLS and are research-based instructional strategies for developing content and language with ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 87% of our ELLs have a home language of Spanish. We offer them one year of either Native Language and Heritage Language Spanish classes. They are placed based on a written diagnostic exam. In these classes Spanish is used as a scaffold to build overall literacy skills. We also have Spanish-bilingual teachers for these students in math and science as well as Spanish and Chinese bilingual guidance counselors. In terms of software we have a subscription th Brainpop that the Social Studies teachers use with struggling students, including ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are programmed in self-contained ENL classes by grade. The curriculum mirrors the ELA curriculum of that same grade. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The AP of Admissions, Danielle Silva, holds an orientation for all new students transitioning from middle school. Within ENL class in the first week, lessons are constructed to orient students to the school. During the year, students get individualized support funding the ENL Academy. The parents and newly enrolled students meet individually with the AP ENL, Nancy Moore for orientation. Ms. Moore also coordinated the Welcome Squad, a group of over 100 students who assist new students throughout the building during the first few days of the term The AP Silva is responsible for training the Guidance Counselors is regards to supporting ELLs in their transition. She is also trained by the AP ENL/ELA is reviewing changes in policies regarding the identification of ELLs at time of admission. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 60  We do not offer language electives, but we do offer multiple levels of the required Spanish classes, including a level for Heritage Language Learners. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The teachers of ELLs will meet for 45 minutes a month on the first Monday of every month from October through May (6 hrs each). The focus of this PD in using the Inquiry Model with following the cycle of development for a group of ELLs and their use of The Writing Revolution skills. These teachers are also supported in developing their craft through regular observations and feedback from their supervisor and the Principal. The teachers (both General Education and Special Education), guidance counselors, speech therapist and paraprofessionals of ELLs across all subjects and disciplines meet monthly in inter-departmental PLCs to examine student work around The Writing Revolution (6 hrs each a year). They share best practices and assess progress on monthly skills. For both groups the Inquiry Cycle looks at: 1) How the student has progressed from the prior month? 2) Where specifically does the target student need to improve on the target skill? 3) What specific interventions will help the student grow and improve on these target skills over the next month? The Records and Pupil Accounting Secretary receives training of maintaining ELLs records through the DOE. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The teachers of ELLs will meet for 45 minutes a month on the first Monday of every month from October through May on for a total of six hours. The focus of this PD in using the Inquiry Model with following the cycle of development for a group of ELLs and their use of The Writing Revolution skills. The monthly Agendas follow the Inquiry Cycle for select ENL students. Teachers examine student progress on Writing using The writing Revolution tasks and method: The Inquiry Cycle looks at: 1) How the student has progressed from the prior month? 2) Where specifically does the target ENL student need to improve on the target skill? 3) What specific interventions will help the ENL student grow and improve on these target skills over the next month? 2018-19 CEP 61  In addition, each ENL teacher has to meet weekly i na focus group for one period (45 minutes) for each grade on ENL they teach with the ELA teachers of that grade. At these meetings each week they specifically plan on scaffolding and developing curriculum to meet the needs of the ENL student. Each ENL teacher meets for approximately 50 hours per year. The teachers (both General Education and Special Education) meet weekly in a focus group for one period (45 minutes) for each grade they teach with the teachers of that grade/content area. At these meetings each week they specifically plan on scaffolding and developing curriculum to meet the needs of the ENL student. Each ENL teacher meets for approximately 50 hours per year. Minutes and attendance are recorded by teacher facilitators through Google Drive . Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? For the 60% of our ELLs who also have IEPs we will coordinate the annual parent meeting with an ENL teacher with the annual IEP conference. For the other 40% of the ELLs, a bilingual Spanish ENL/ELA teacher will conduct phone conferences with parents who cannot travel in. For parents who have a preferred language other than Spanish, we will coordinate translation and interpretation services with the help of our AP Parent Engagement. Language Proficiency Assessment results in the form of the NYSESLAT are distributed to all parents in writing and sent with the student and recollected and logged by the teacher. Letters not returned are mailed to parents. Language development needs are reviewed one-on-one with the parents by the three ENL teachers in person or by phone after the first marking period report cards are issued. We will document all conversations by way of a shared Google form. All parent communication (phone, email, letter, in person) for IEP Annual Review meetings are also logged within each ELL-SWD event log within SESIS- official DOE online IEP management system. All annnouncements (phone, email, letter, in person) are made in English and Spanish and other language upon request using the Language Interpretation Line 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our AP of Parent Engagement, Danielle Silva, is bilingual Spanish-speaker. She runs the PA meetings This year, we are using our Title III funds to assign a Spanish-speaking teacher to translate at monthly Parents Association meetings. The AP and teacher will meet with parents on ELLs the hour before the start of the general meeting to provide more individualized support. The goal is to present to parents with social emotional support resources available at HSFI. Social Workers from Long Island University will be there to inform parent how they can receive support through their institution. The goal is to expose HSFI parents and students about post secondary opportunities in the Visual Arts along with Live Model Drawing. A speaker from SVA will present information on careers in the Arts. Art supplies will be provided to families. Our new school website allows for automatic translation in the six high incidence languages. We have a Spanish Bilingual para-professionals who works within the Special Ed ELLs classroom and are involved in parent phone outreach. The AP Parent Engagement sends important information to parents in both English and Spanish via mailings and Phone-2018-19 CEP 62  masters. Our electronic gradebook, Jupitergrades.com, allows us to send messages and generate progress reports in Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daryl Blank, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HS of Fashion Industries School DBN: 02M600 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Daryl Blank Title Principal Nancy Moore Assistant Principal Danielle Silva Erica Thomas Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Guzman Parent Jennifer Bohner/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Hally Drabman/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Marisol Rosales N/A N/A N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/12/17 10/12/17 10/12/17 10/12/17 10/18/17 10/12/17 10/12/17 00/00/00 00/00/00 20/12/17 10/12/17 00/00/00 00/00/00 00/00/00 00/00/00 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M600 School Name: High School of Fashion Industries Superintendent: MarisolRosales The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No A.P. of Admissions & Parent Engagement Yes Yes Danielle Silva * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS reports are downloaded at the beginning of the school year to assess the different home languages of HSFI families. It is standard protocol in the Main Office to pull up a student's biographical page to note language preferences when working with families. Updated emergency blue cards will be the primary sources of identifying the home language of student families. All updated ATS info will be uploaded to a school wide google doc specifically highlighting family language preference as reference. Assigned school personnel in the Main Office will be able to edit this live document when needed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 66  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral American Sign Language 0 593 27.24 595 27.34 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 .05 0 0 0 0 .05 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 .05 0 0 0 0 .05 2018-19 CEP 67 0 .14 0 .37 0 0 0 1.47 0 69.13 .18 0 .32 .05 .09 0 .23 0 .09 .05 .09 0 0 .14 0 0 0 3 0 8 0 1 0 25 0 1503 5 0 7 1 2 0 5 6 2 1 2 0 0 3 0 0 0 .14 0 .37 0 .05 0 1.15 0 69.07 .23 0 .32 .05 .09 0 .23 .28 .09 .05 .09 0 0 .14 0 0 3 0 8 0 0 0 32 0 1505 4 0 7 1 2 0 5 0 2 1 2 0 0 3 0 0 Arabic Assamese Bengali Bulgarian Cantonese Chinese- Dialect Unknown Chinese- Any Dzongkha English French Gujarati Haitian Creole Hindi Italian Japanese Korean Mandarin Nepali Pilipino (Tagalog) Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbo-Croatian Slovak Spanish Swahili Tadzhik Tibetan Turkish Twi Urdu Uzbek Vietnamese Wolof  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English, Chinese (any) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Our parent blog/newsletter and The newsletter is posted on a weekly basis. School wide announcements via school messenger School messengers are sent by the principal on a weekly basis. plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. A written translation in Spanish of the newsletter will be posted to the schools website on a bi-weekly basis. Any other language will be translated in written form upon request. School wide announcements via school messenger will be translated in Spanish along with the English message. each school messenger translation will include a voice recording in the 2018-19 CEP 68  form of a automated phone message and written translation via email. Any other language will be translated in written form upon request. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Fall Conferences, Spring Conferences, Translation Services will also be arranged for parents during November 9-10 March 8-9 Parent Association Meetings (third Wed. of very month except for December) September 26, 2018, October 17, 2018, November 14, 2018, December 5, 2018, January 23, 2019, February 27, 2019, March 20, 2019, April 24, 2019, May 22, 2019 and, June 12, 2019 interpretation service(s)?  Services from the Big Word will be requested for Parent Teacher Conferences.  Translation services in other languages besides Spanish for all meetings including but limited to PA meeting and PT conferences will provided upon request.  All faculty will have Language Line cards and directions provided from DOE LIT kits. Faculty will be trained and directed to use language line as an additional translation resource.  Title I funding will be used to pay a teacher to translate in Spanish for all Parent Association meetings.  Translation services in other languages besides Spanish for all meetings including but limited to PA meeting and PT conferences will provided upon request. Language Line cards is an additional translation resource.  2018-19 CEP 69  New Student Orientation June 13, 2019 June 14, 2019 IEP Meetings Upon Request  Services from the Big Word will be requested for New Student Orientation.  Translation services in other languages besides Spanish for all meetings including bit limited to PA meeting and PT conferences will provided upon request. Language Line cards is an additional translation resource.    HSFI faculty will accommodate the perferred language of the family Services from the Big Word will be requested for IEP Conferences if a HSFI faculty member is not able or available to translate in the family's perferred language.  All faculty will have Language Line cards and directions provided from DOE LIT kits. Faculty will be trained and directed to use language line as an additional translation resource. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Notification of school emergencies are posted on our website and communicated through school messenger. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The staff will made aware of policies and procedures during the first faculty meeting of each semester. Laminated Language ID cards and Instructions for Language Line are given to all faculty. faculty is required to hang up this information in their classroom in an accessible place. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 70  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents will be made aware of their right to receive translated information via the parent portal of our website; http://fashionhighschool.net/apps/pages/index.jsp?uREC_ID=129061&type=d&pREC_ID=255551 Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will complete a survey at the end of the year about the quality of translated documents. Parents will also complete a survey after receiving over the phone/in house translation services. 2018-19 CEP 71 
