2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M655 School Name: LIFE SCIENCES SECONDARY SCHOOL Principal: KIMBERLY SWANSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Life Sciences Secondary School 02M655 310200011655 6-12 School Number (DBN): 320 East 96 th Street, New York, NY 10128 (212) 348-1694 (212) 348-4293 Phone Number: Fax: Kimberly Swanson kswanson2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Kimberly Swanson DianahCantres Maritza Rodriguez ElyseGosselin MaritzaRodriguez Jessica Toribio JayquannKing-Higgins N/A District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 212 356-7563 Fax: 212 356-7514 Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 705-5856 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kimberly Swanson DianahCantres MaritzaRodriguez N/A MaritzaRodriguez JayquannKing-Higgins Jessica Toribio N/A ElyseGosselin Jason Broman Ryan O'Connell *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) HuendyLluberes Katherine Garcia Sandra Rossi Paula Magana Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Life Sciences Secondary School, we provide an innovative and rigorous academic curriculum that facilitates the development of critical thinking skills through project-based learning across all subject areas. Our students also have the opportunity to participate in a variety of elective courses, extracurricular activities, and athletic programs that allow them to pursue their passions. We nurture a safe environment where students know that they are capable of growing and improving. Our commitment is to prepare every student for high school, college, careers, and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located on the border of the Upper East Side and East Harlem, Life Sciences Secondary School is a 9-12 school targeting students who are interested in pursuing careers in the sciences, particularly the medical field. We offer the core science sequence and a variety of science-themes electives. All 9th grade students begin their science sequence with Physics First in order to challenge students with rigorous science coursework immediately upon entering high school. Students have the opportunity to take Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry, AP Biology, Bioethics, Bio med Technology, Forensic Science, Marine Science, and AP Psychology. We also offer a full range of visual arts, vocal music, and instrumental music in order to allow students to pursue their artistic passions. Strengths of the school include a strong school culture due to a collaborative atmosphere where all staff support one other and our students. Additionally, students benefit from many advanced level courses through Advanced Placement (Biology, World History, Government, Literature, Forensics, and Toxicology). We also offer a variety of PSAL athletics (basketball, soccer, baseball, soccer, volleyball) and other extracurricular activities (Model United Nations, Science Club, Chess Club, Young Men's and Women's Empowerment Groups, GSA, Anime Club, Natural Hair Club, School newspaper, Yearbook Club, and ARISTA Honor Society). This year, LSSS is part of the College Access for All Initiative and and will be partnering with One Goal to support our students in making post secondary plans and completing the college application process. Seniors have an opportunity to take LINCT courses that will prepare them for the English and Math placement exams at CUNY and College Now courses at Hunter College, which will allow them to earn college credit while still in high school. We are also a Presidential partner of Monore College who generously provides all of our graduating seniors with full-tuition funding if they attend Monroe. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently, the greatest needs of the school community are 1) developing practices for looking closely at student work in order to implement scaffolds that support all students in accessing rigorous, culturally-responsive learning tasks and 2) continuing to build our instructional and social-emotional practices that allow us to meet the needs of all of our students including students with IEPs and English Language Learners. We have developed a theory of action aligned with these needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, we made significant progress around teacher collaboration. As a community, we value collaborations that allow us to grow professionally, share best practices, and assess the effectiveness of our work. We currently have the following teams in place that allow us to distribute leadership around our instructional priorities:  Department Team Leaders meet weekly with the Principal and Assistant Principals to discuss and determine instructional priorities, engage in inquiry, and receive coaching and feedback on rolling out inquiry work on their teams. As a result of this targeted work to build team leader capacity, all Department Teams engage in cycles of inquiry throughout the school year.  The PPT (Guidance Staff, Assistant Principal, General Education Teacher, and Special Education Teacher) meets weekly to identify students who need additional support and interventions due to behavior, attendance, or academics. We look at data gathered by our AP Security, Guidance Team, and teachers in order to identify and implement interventions and BIPs for students who are struggling.  The Administrative Cabinet meets weekly to discuss instructional priorities, upcoming deadlines, and to review observation data to target coaching and professional development.  The SIT (Guidance Staff, Assistant Principal, General Education Teacher, Special Education Teacher, and School Psychologist) meets weekly to engage in the work outlined in our Special Education Action Plan including the creation of systems and structures around ensuring quality IEP writing and timely scheduling of Special Education compliance items. This team also conducts MDRs when necessary. 2018-19 CEP 10   The Equity Team meets to analyze and unpack data to identify areas where we may unintentionally be causing or perpetuating inequities within our school community. This team also support the planning and facilitation of professional learning sessions with staff and students using the Courageous Conversations About Race Protocol. The purpose of these sessions is to identify the causalities of the achievement gap within our school community and to begin to identify how we can close the gap. This year, we will build on the work of the Equity Team through a school wide Theory of Action grounded in Culturally Responsive instructional practices. School leadership has worked closely with these teams to provide feedback and coaching to move their work forward. Additional coaching has been provided to team leaders to support their leadership and facilitation skills. We frequently send our Team Leaders out for additional professional learning through the Superintendent’s Office and the Manhattan Field Support Center. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M655 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 574 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 39 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 78.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 58.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 5% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 77% 47% 48.4% 2.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 116 116 80.4% 2.3% 21.3% 29.1% 6.6% 2.3% 6 32% 7.1 22.6% 38% 70% 59% 89.8% 20% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -85.48% of students in Cohort W, 64.23% of students in Cohort V, and 72.73% of students in Cohort U earned 10+ credits in the 2017-2018 school year - The 4-year graduation rate in June 2018 was 74.7% -The most recent Quality Review feedback indicated that consistent access to and ownership of rigorous curricula that cognitively engages all students was uneven and hinders college and career readiness for all students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will use data from student surveys, student work, and student performance on classroom and State assessments to create/ adjust unit plans, lesson plans, and tasks that align to standards and the schoolwide theory of action. These instructional shifts will result in improved Advance rating in components 1a, 1e and 3c, as well as increased course pass rates and averages for all students by June and a 3% reduction in the male-female achievement gap. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analyze Spring item analysis data paying close attention to subgroups: Students with IEPs, ELLs, Black and Hispanic Males; Reflect on the implications of our item analysis data for our Theory of Action and for Department Team inquiry work Develop a shared understanding of culturally-responsive instructional practices Create a school-wide toolkit of culturally-responsive instructional strategies as a resources for teachers; this will be a living document that teachers can add to as they engage in their inquiry work Team Leaders, Teachers Teachers Teachers September-October 2018 All Department Team Leaders, School Leadership School Leadership, Team Leaders School Leadership, Team Leaders September-December 2018 November 2018-June 2019 (ongoing) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share their updated curriculum with parents in order to provide guidance on how they can further support students at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal; Assistant Principal; Team Leaders; Monday professional development block; 3 times per week Department Team meeting time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 75% of classroom observations will show evidence of teachers designing and implementing rigorous, culturally-responsive learning tasks across content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance observation reports, data collected through informal walk-throughs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  The 2016-17 school survey data reveals the following: o 77% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria. o 59% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. o 51% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the expansion of Courageous Conversations About Race, Restorative Circles, a Positive Behavior Intervention System, and the continued integration of guidance and discipline systems will ensure that students feel physically and emotionally secure as measured by a 10% increase in the number of students that say that their teachers support them when they are upset on the School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of a school-wide PBIS System Implementation of restorative circles in the advisory program expanded from 9th grade to 10th grade Evaluate and adjust systems and structures for safety and student behavior Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PBIS Team, Guidance Staff, Students Advisors, Guidance Staff, Students Teachers, Deans, Guidance Staff October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 (weekly) October 2018-June 2019 School Leadership, Teacher Leaders School Leadership, Teacher Leaders Principal, Deans Professional development, in-class activities, and parent workshops on growth mindset and restorative approaches to discipline Parents, All Staff, Students October 2018-June 2019 (monthly) Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Deans, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops on growth mindset and restorative approaches to discipline Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Staff (Administration, Teachers, Deans, Guidance, Support Staff, Parent Coordinator); Restore 360 training through OSYD; Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 5% increase in the number of students that say that their teachers support them when they are upset as measured by a mid-year survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS incident data and SOHO suspension data, survey data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -On the most recent Quality Review, the school earned a proficient rating on indicator 4.2 (Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning); this indicator was rated developing on the previous Quality Review -Teacher Teams met 3 times during the school week during the 2017-2018 school year in order to engage in vertical planning and cycles of inquiry -Scholarship data demonstrated that the pass rates in ICT classes were significantly lower than in non-ICT classes during the 2017-2018 school year Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Professional development, coaching support, and co-planning time time will be dedicated to ICT partners resulting in a 10% increase in student pass rates when looking at the scholarship data for ICT classes from June 2018 to June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implement common planning periods three times per week for all teachers on Department Teams; implement daily common planning for all ICT teacher pairs Teachers Department Teams engage in 8-week Cycles of Inquiry (3 cycles) connected to our school wide theory of action. Teachers Professional development facilitated by school leadership and the Special Education team on the expectations for co-teachers and the different co-teaching models Teachers September 2018-June 2019 (3 times per week) October 2018-June 2019 (1 cycle per 8 weeks) October 2018 Targeted feedback and coaching for ICT pairs. Teachers who teach ICT courses September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership, Programmer, Team Leaders School Leadership, Team Leaders School Leadership, Special Education Liaisons Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent and student involvement as part of the IEP process Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Leaders; LPP Coach; Per Session; Common Planning Periods for ICT teacher; Team Meeting Periods for all teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of classroom observations will show evidence of ICT co-teachers strategically using co-teaching strategies to support the needs of their students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation reports, data collected through informal walk-throughs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -Based on the 2016-2017 Advance data, Danielson domains 1e and 3c are the areas where there was demonstrated need for improvement. -The school was rated developing on Quality Review Indicator 1.2 (research-based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will receive a minimum of six observations accompanied by actionable feedback and next steps based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching resulting in at least one level of growth in 1e and 3c by 75% of teachers from September 2018 through June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Specific goals set in collaboration between each teacher and their supervisor during the Initial Planning Conferences; Goals based on teacher self-assessment and Advance data from the 2017-2018 school year. Teachers September 2018 School Leadership Completion of 6 Advance observations for each teacher with specific, actionable feedback that is connected to professional development and our theory of action. Teachers Midyear self-assessment and adjustment of teacher goals in collaboration between each teacher and their supervisor. Teachers End-of-Year self-assessment and feedback between each teacher and their supervisor Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-May 2019 (at least one observation per 6 weeks) February 2019 May-June 2019 School Leadership School Leadership School Leadership How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal; Assistant Principal; Team Leaders; Monday Professional Development Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 50% of teachers show movement in Danielson components 1a or 3c between June 2018 and February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -Approximately 20% of parents interact with the school directly each year. This is based on the parent survey, teacher feedback, and attendance at family events. -75% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. -The attendance rate for 2018-2019 was 81% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement a system for one-on-one conferencing with students each marking period that will include progress reports that will be shared with families regarding student performance and attendance in each of their classes resulting in a 5 percent increase in student attendance. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of a system for one-on-one conferencing with students Teachers, Parents, Students Implementation of a system to mail reports from each conference home to families Parents, Students September 2018- June 2019 (once/ marking period) October 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Leadership, Teachers Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Reports from conferences will be mailed home to families Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Contractual teacher events and family engagement time, online grading system which will translate information into Spanish, and family focused special events including parent association meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 4% increase in student attendance as compared with 2017-2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 26  Student Attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Tier I (i.e. Word Generation)-all students. Tier 2(i.e. tutoring)- students who fail one or more classes; student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families. Tier I (i.e. Word Generation)-all students. Tier 2(i.e. tutoring)- students who fail one or more classes; student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families. Tier I (i.e. Word Generation)-all students. Tier 2(i.e. tutoring)- students who fail one or more classes; student need as communicated by students, teachers, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Office Hours; After School Tutoring; After School Regents Prep; Lunchtime Tutoring; Saturday Regents prep; Co- teaching (Special Education) Office Hours; After School Tutoring; After School Regents Prep; Lunchtime Tutoring; Saturday Regents prep; Co- teaching (Special Education) Office Hours; After School Tutoring; After School Regents Prep; Lunchtime Tutoring; Saturday Regents prep; Co- teaching (Special Education) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group; One-to- one; tutoring; online Before School After School Lunch Periods Small Group; One-to- one; tutoring; online Before School After School Lunch Periods Small Group; One-to- one; tutoring; online Before School After School Lunch Periods 2018-19 CEP 28  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) counselors and families. Tier I (i.e. Word Generation)-all students. Tier 2(i.e. tutoring)- students who fail one or more classes; student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families. IEP mandated counseling; Recommendations by teachers; Post- suspension support where necessary Small Group; One-to- one; tutoring; online Before School After School Lunch Periods Office Hours; After School Tutoring; After School Regents Prep; Lunchtime Tutoring; Saturday Regents prep; Co- teaching (Special Education) Counseling; Connecting students and families to outside services Small Group; Individual Throughout the school day; After School 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 21 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. -Basic school supplies at the beginning of the school year and as needed throughout the year -After school academic support programs -Counseling services as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Attendance at NYCDOE and university recruitment fairs  Recruitment from DOE pool of highly qualified applicants  Partnerships with New York City Teaching Fellows and Peace Corps Fellows  Co-teaching to ensure Students with Disabilities are in the Least Restrictive Environment  Pipeline to leadership for teachers (Model Teachers/ Peer Collaborative Teachers)  Adjustment to program to ensure teachers are teaching within their area of certification 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Whole school professional development on Monday afternoons, on the Chancellor’s professional development days, and daily during common planning time Department Teams meet 3 times per week to work on the following:  Cycles of learning  Co-teacher planning (ICT and ENL)  Curriculum Development Professional development will include the following components: -Analyze Spring item analysis data in middle school and high school paying close attention to subgroups: Students with IEPs, ELLs, Black and Hispanic Males -Reflect on the implications of our item analysis data for our Theory of Action and for Department Team inquiry work -Develop a shared understanding of culturally-responsive instruction (definition, research, practice) 2018-19 CEP 32  -Create a school-wide toolkit of culturally-responsive instructional strategies as a resources for teachers; this will be a living document that teachers can add to as they engage in their inquiry work -Implement and receive feedback on scaffold that are designed to close the gaps in student knowledge and skills that are identified through the use of "Student Work Analysis" protocols Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Measures of Student Learning Team includes teachers who select Local Measures of Student Learning. Teacher Leaders lead cycles of learning that use student data to improve instructional practice. Professional development and coaching will be provided to ensure teachers are able to analyze data from assessments and use this data to inform instructional decisions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 CEP 33  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 344,638 12,366 3,510,375 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 34  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Life Sciences Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Life Sciences Secondary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; and 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 2018-19 CEP 37  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Life Sciences Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; and ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. 2018-19 CEP 39  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; and share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child.   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on 2018 NYSESLAT, scholarship, and Regents examination data, students who are at the entering and emerging levels, as well as those not on track to be promoted to the next grade level will be programmed for our after-school ENL/ ELA Title III enrichment program and Saturday ENL/ content enrichment program. Students at these levels have the lowest pass rates on Regents examinations and in their core academic classes. A review of Regents item analysis data and classroom assessments has revealed that our ELLs need support with development of academic English vocabulary across all content areas. Data from the assessments mentioned above, as well as ongoing formative assessments will be used to plan targeted lessons and adjust instructional strategies to support students enrolled in after-school and Saturday School courses. These supplemental programs, are designed and implemented to address closing the achievement gap and increasing student achievement to each targeted student. Although targeted supports will be provided for each student, the overarching instructional focus will be on developing academic vocabulary across content areas. Our Saturday enrichment program will be focused on supporting ELLs in the core content areas of Social Studies, Math, and Science. The Saturday program runs for 3 hours (1 hour per content area). Our after-school enrichment program will be focused on ELA support. The language of instruction for both programs is English with home language scaffolds provided as needed and determined by the ENL-certified teacher. Materials used for the programs will include fiction and non-fiction texts. Students will use iPads to conduct web-based research for academic writing. Students will also be able to use a variety of apps to support them with academic vocabulary development. This programs will both start the week of October 15th and run through the last week of May for a total of 29 after-school sessions and 27 Saturday School sessions. Students who are at the entering and emerging levels in grades 9-12 will be programmed for these programs, which will be taught by 2 ENL teachers and 2 content area teachers (Science, ELA). All Title III enrichment programs will be team taught by 2 teachers and at least 50% of direct instruction is provided by the certified ENL teacher. The student-teacher ratio for each class offered after-school and on Saturdays will be 2 teachers (1 content and 1 ENL):30 students. Students will be programmed for after-school classes on Wednesdays from 2:45-4:45 on on Saturdays from 9:30-12:30. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will be offered to all content teachers during our professional learning time on Mondays (80 minutes per week). The purpose of our professional development is to ensure ELLs receive appropriate supports to be successful across all content areas. This year, all 2018-19 CEP 43  Part C: Professional Development staff will be provided with professional development on scaffolding instruction for ELLs and culturally-responsive instructional practices. The intended impact of this professional development is to support teachers in strengthening their relationships with the ELLs in their classes and to ensure ELLs receive targeted supports to master the concepts and skills aligned with all content-area standards with a specific focus on academic vocabulary (as per the Regents/ NYSESLAT/ Scholarship data referenced above). The training will be facilitated by the principal, Kim Swanson, who is a certified ENL teacher. Department Team Leaders will also facilitate professional development on looking at student work for gaps in knowledge and skills with a specific lens on the work of ELLs. They will look at ELL performance on the NYSELAT exam and the Regents exams given in their department to identify the concepts/ skills the ELL students in their courses have not mastered. They then identify research-based strategies to support students in mastering these skills and monitor the progress made during each cycle. This student work analysis will occur in 8-week cycles from November through May and will be supported by administration. Targeted professional development for our Title III teachers will occur on the following Mondays: December 17, 2018 (2:40-4:00): Strategies for Scaffolding Instruction for ELLS January 14, 2018 (2:40-4:00): Academic Vocabulary in Content Areas February 11, 2018 (2:40-4:00): Supporting ELLS on a Path to College Readiness Records for this professional learning is maintained on the school's Google Drive. Data from this work will help inform the instructional supports provided to ELLs during after-school and Saturday enrichment programming for ELLs. Professional development will not be funded by Title III funds. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs are invited to a year-long training series that occurs the third Tuesday of September, November, January, March, and April from 5:00-6:00 (a total of 10 meetings). These meetings are facilitated by the ENL teacher, the Guidance Counselors, and the Parent Coordinator. We also ensure that translators are available for these events. Reminders for these meetings are sent out in parent's preferred language via our school messenger system. Refreshments for parent meetings will be covered by Title I funds. Title III parent engagement activities will be at no cost to Title III. Topics for the meetings are determined based on needs identified through parent surveys given by the school: September 18th- The college application process for ELLs November 20th- Information on after-school and Saturday School programming for ELLs January 15th- Graduation and Regents requirements for ELLs March 19th- NYSESLAT April 16th- Presentations from community-based organizations that work with our ENL students and their families 2018-19 CEP 44  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $12110.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Saturday School: 2 Teachers x 27 sessions x 3 hours x $60.55 = $9809.10 After-School: 2 teachers x 9.5 sessions x 2 hours x $60.55 = $2300.90 The School will cover the cost of the additional after-school sessions. n/a and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a Refreshments for Parent meetings $12366.00 n/a n/a $256.00 $12366.00 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Life Sciences Secondary School Borough Manhattan School Number 655 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kimberly Swanson Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angela Pieter Teacher/Subject Area Elyse Mauriello Teacher/Subject Area Ryan O'Connell Related-Service Provider Beth Feldman (Speech) Superintendent Assistant Principal Steve Gilhooley Coach School Counselor Dianah Cantres Parent Maritza Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Cecilia Marshall Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 46  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 592 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the NYSITELL scores, Spanish LAB scores, DRP assessments, informal tests of phonemic awareness and teacher observations of student reading and writing to assess the early literacy levels of our ELLs. New York City Performance-Based Tasks are also used to track progress. This data is recorded and shared at grade and department team meetings so that all teachers that come in contact with these students throughout the day are aware of their reading and writing levels. These discussions inform our instructional decisions across the curriculum. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 47  The Pupil Personnel Secretary notifies an administrator when a student needs to be administered the home language survey. Administration coordinates with ENL staff to administer the survey and NYSITELL when necessary. Grade Teams look at data for subgroups of students including ELLs as part of their cycles of inquiry. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school leadership, inquiry teams, and individual teachers gather and disaggregate data from a variety of sources to determine the success of our programs for ELLs, including the School Quality Review, Quality Guide, scholarship data from each marking period, student transcript reviews, Regents pass rates and item analyses, NYC Performance-based assessments, class assignments and projects, interviews and surveys with students and parents, etc. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers use data to inform instruction and support for each student they work with. Grade Teams engage in Kid Talk protocols to identify additional interventions that can be implemented across content areas to support ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, Regents Examinations, NYC Performance Tasks, and the DRP assessment 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Data Specialist pulls data for ELLs. Our programmer works with administration to make adjustments to ENL programming based on student outcomes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Life Sciences Secondary School only offers a freestanding ENL program. Entering and emerging students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL and 1 unit (180 minutes) of standalone ENL respectively. Transitioning, expanding, and commanding students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL where our ENL teacher co-teaches with our ELA teachers. All ELLs at each grade level are programmed for the same ELA course in order to facilitate this co-teaching schedule. The standalone ENL courses are homogeneous and ungraded. The integrated ENL courses are heterogenous. The co-teaching model for instruction where the ENL teacher plans and teaches collaboratively with the ELA teacher allows ELLs to develop full English proficiency in a content-rich, supportive and differentiated learning environment focused on college readiness. In this least restrictive environment, ELLs have full access to academic content areas with the support of an ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 48  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Life Sciences Secondary School only offers a freestanding ENL program. Entering and emerging students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL and 1 unit (180 minutes) of standalone ENL respectively. Transitioning, expanding, and commanding students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL where our ENL teacher co-teaches with our ELA teachers. As the ELA class addresses ELA standards, the student is awarded ELA credit for the course while also fulfilling the mandated ENL requirements. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our model, each grade has the ELA course co-taught with the ENL teacher and a content teacher. The ENL teacher works to differentiate the lesson and appropriate supports for each ELL. Sometimes, this involves modifying the material, providing Native Language support or creating a different activity where material is presented using multiple intelligences. In content classes that are not co-taught, there is always opportunity for content teachers to work and plan with the ENL teachers to ensure that they are confident in delivering instruction to ELLs that meets the demands of NYS Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure students are properly evaluated in their native language by our administration of the Spanish LAB. In addition, teachers who are fluent in students' first languages assess students' understanding of content throughout the year. Students also have access to books, dictionaries, and translation software in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. If students are classified as SIFE, all teachers are informed and provided strategies for use in instruction. The ENL teacher works closely with the students to help develop the students' phonemic awareness. If their first language is Spanish, we work to develop their Spanish literacy, while simultaneously exposing them to a small pieces of text. We also patiently help transition the student into a school setting and teach them the norms of school behavior. Visualization and kinesthetic activities are the primary focus of their assessment. Content area teachers use differentiated assignments and assessments and all teachers on a team are aware of individual student goals. SIFE students can also attend after school Beginner ENL instruction. We also have an attendance team that works hard and follows up to ensure these students attend school. b. Newcomers are supported in all of their classes with native language supports, visual aids, bilingual dictionaries, alternate assessments and assignments, and assitive technology where possible. Extra time is given to the students if they need it. Our newcomers can attend after school Beginner ENL. Content area teachers are aware of individual student goals, and reading and writing instruction is heavily scaffolded to meet the individual student needs. c and d. Developing and long term ELLs all receive their mandated time. Accommodations are provided to individual students as needed. During Grade Team meetings, the ENL teacher discusses and advocates for the needs of these students and teachers to collaborate on the instructional goals and plans. We have text books and materials in native language available for student use. Teachers work to develop appropriate groupings in their classrooms and we always rely on differentiated assignments and assessments. e. ELLs who pass the NYSESLAT continue to follow the ENL schedule the first two years after testing proficient as a component of the continuing transitional support they receive. We work conscientiously in grade teams to program our students into 2018-19 CEP 49  cohorts that will best serve their educational needs. Test modifications are provided for the required amount of time after ELLs pass the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs receive their mandated ENL instruction in a co-teaching environment. They can also take after school ENL and they receive their content area classes in either an ICT or a self-contained class where they receive the academic support of a special education teacher and a general education content teacher. Many of our ELL-SWDs use English as their primary language so we provide differentiated reading and writing support in their preferred language. Content and skills are scaffolded in ENL and ICT classes to help prepare these students for the Regents exams. Various literacy strategies are modeled and practiced along with visual and auditory support. Para-professionals also assist several of these students throughout the day and students have access to assistive technology as necessary. Many of our ELL-SWDs also participate in the Wilson reading program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In our heterogenously grouped, inclusive school, our ELL-SWDs are programmed for the least restrictive environment. They are also parallel programmed to receive their ENL instruction with an ENL teacher each day. Entering and emerging students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL and 1 unit (180 minutes) of standalone ENL respectively. Transitioning, expanding, and commanding students are programmed for 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL where our ENL teacher co-teaches with our ELA teachers. In addition, we have a number of options in terms of extra-curricular and academic support programs that we offer all ELLs including ELL Students with Disabilities: daily lunchtime and after-school tutoring, Saturday courses for Regents preparation, after school courses, Summer School, library access during lunch where we have an extensive selection of high interest books in English and other languages; afterschool arts, leadership, and sports programs, etc. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer tutoring before school and after school in all content areas (ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies, Arts, Language), as well as in literacy development that crosses all content areas. Intervention services are offered in English with home language support as needed. Our ELLs can also take an intensive English language course after school. We also offer Regents preparation courses on select Saturdays. All of these intervention programs are open to our English Language Learners in all subgroups. The language of instruction is English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we hired a second full-time ENL teacher to accommodate the programming demands of our growing ELL population. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs receive their services in our inclusive, heterogeneously grouped classrooms through an integrated co-teaching model. All of our extra-curricular and academic support programs have open access for all ELLs: daily lunchtime and after-school tutoring; Saturday classes for Regents preparation, after school classes, summer school, library access during lunch and after school arts, leadership, and sports programs. We ensure that students and parents are notified of these programs in their preferred language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 50  Instructional materials used include grade level texts, native language texts, computer labs, electronic translators, dictionaries, thesauri, and interactive Smartboard activities. These supports are used across all content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only offer an ENL program. While the language of instruction is English, students have access to home language support through their ENL teacher, peers, dictionaries, electronic translators, and translated texts where appropriate. These supports include books and software in their native language and collaboration with peers of their native language in classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Integrated ENL services are used as much as possible to ensure students have access to appropriate grade level curriculum and texts. Our ENL teacher coordinates with teachers of students who are mandated stand-alone services to ensure that the instruction students receive is aligned with appropriate grade level curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All new students participate in a summer orientation, which introduces new students to our school through tours, welcome packets, etc. ELLs are included in this program. The ENL Coordinator works closely with all ELLs over the course of the year. She follows their progress and works with them every day in multiple contexts: class, stand alone classes, one-one conversations, and after-school help. She also arranges parent-teacher conferences when needed, or meetings between teachers and students. Newly-admitted ELLs receive this same attention at a more intensified level for their first year at the school. The ENL Coordinator also pairs new students with student ambassadors who can help them navigate the workings of the school, including social situations. Our Parent-Coordinator assists with translation services to support parents and students as needed and our Guidance Counselors check in with students regularly. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The principal (a former ENL teacher) and the ENL Coordinator create a professional development plan focused on developing teacher capacities for content teachers to support ELLs in the content area classrooms. There is one session per month of our Monday professional development time (the first Monday of each month) that is dedicated to this work. All content area teachers attend this professional development. Guidance Counselors, the Parent Coordinator, and secretaries are sent to 2018-19 CEP 51  professional development opportunities outside of the building when possible. The ENL teacher is sent to professional development opportunities organized by the Borough Field Support Center. The ENL teacher also engages in professional development aligned with QTEL to help support her work in delivering CCLS-aligned curriculum. She is also given feedback and support through regular observations and coaching sessions with the Principal. Content area teachers are provided with professional development during our Monday professional development time, as well as through feedback provided by administrators during observations and coaching sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Guidance Staff and ENL Coordinator provide professional development to 9 th grade teachers on strategies to support students who are transitioning into out school for the first time. The Guidance Staff and ENL teacher attend training through Central and the Field Support Center. There is one session per month of our Monday professional development time that is dedicated to professional development around serving the needs of our ELLs. The ENL teacher is sent to additional professional development opportunities organized by the Borough Field Support Center. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept for these meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each fall, our ENL Coordinator invites parents of ELLs to set up a one-on-one meeting with her to discuss their child's progress and goals for the upcoming school year. Interpretation services are provided for all parents at this meeting when they do not speak the languages of our ENL Coordinator. Our ENL Coordinator keeps a binder with the details of these meeting and all communication with parents of ELLs. These meetings are conducted via telephone when parents are not available to come into the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited in for monthly PA and SLT meetings. Translation and interpretation services are provided for all of these events. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator is organizing an opportunity for parents to participate in English classes at the school this year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kimberly Swanson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Life Sciences Secondary School School DBN: 02M655 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kimberly Swanson Title Principal Steve Gilhooley Assistant Principal Cecilia Marshall Parent Coordinator Angela Pieter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maritza Rodriguez Parent Elyse Mauriello Teacher/Subject Area Ryan O'Connell Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Dianah Cantres School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Beth Feldman Other Speech Team N/A N/A Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/2/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/2/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M655 School Name: Life Sciences Secondary School Superintendent: MarisolRosales The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cecilia Marshall Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written and oral translation needs, all students receive the DOE Language Preference Forms and these are collected by our Pupil Personnel Secretary. The Home Language Identification Survey is given to each new student. We also use ATS, Blue Emergency Card information and, when applicable, the student's IEP. In addition, parent surveys and informal assessments are conducted during our Parent Association meetings and Parnt-Teacher Conferences. Finally, teachers use Parent Engagement time to call home at the beginning of the year to determine the best way to maintain effective communication between the home and our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 56  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Arabic 1157 324 19 11 79.52 21.26 1.25 .72 1156 324 19 12 75.85 21.26 1.25 .79 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student handbooks School Calendar September Monthly Newsletters at the end of each month Announcements for Parent-Teacher Conferences 2 weeks prior to each event After School Calendars October and February The documents will be completed two weeks prior to dissemination in order to ensure time for translation by staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The documents will be completed two weeks prior to dissemination in order to ensure time for translation by staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The documents will be completed two weeks prior to dissemination in order to ensure time for translation by staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The documents will be completed two weeks prior to dissemination in order to ensure time for translation by staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences 4 times per year Parent Association meetings once monthly Guidance, Dean, Attendance, and teacher meetings ongoing SLT Once monthly interpretation service(s)? Staff on sight to support translation of Spanish and Arabic; Translation and Interpretation Unit called for other languages Staff on sight to support translation of Spanish and Arabic; Translation and Interpretation Unit called for other languages Staff on sight to support translation of Spanish and Arabic; Translation and Interpretation Unit called for other languages Staff on sight to support translation of Spanish and Arabic; Translation and Interpretation Unit called for other languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Staff or phone calls in collaborating with the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be made to limited-English proficient families in the case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Language Access Coordinator trains all staff in September on Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the resources (i.e. on site staff, Translation and Interpretation Unit) that are available to support compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 58  Our school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by maintaining all translation needs in ATS and by maintaining current Blue Cards for each student. Signs are posted that indicate the availability of language services in our high and low incident languages. Parents will also receive written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services through distribution of the Parent Bills of Rights and the Family Guide provided in the appropriate language. This information is disseminated in our orientation packet and again during PTA meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will survey parents during our parent Association meetings and Parent-Teacher Conferences to assess the quality of services and make necessary adjustments. Surveys will be translated in advance for parents who need them in languages other than English. 2018-19 CEP 59 
