2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75M721 School Name: P.S. M721 - MANHATTAN OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING CENTER Principal: SHOLOM FRIED 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information 721M - Manhattan Occupational Training Center 307500011721 Grades 6 through 12 School Number (DBN): 75M721 250 West Houston Street, New York, NY 10014 (212) 675-7926 (212) 255-3227 Fax: sfried4@schools.nyc.gov Sholom Fried SholomFried Email Address: Phone Number: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tracy Raymond Timothy Johnson Laura Hanrahan N/A Alexis Philips Donte Herman As needed District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1520 Phone Number: (212) 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) District 75 Manhattan Kathleen LeFevre FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: KLefevr@schools.nyc.gov District 75 400 First Avenue, New York 10025 Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-468-5933 Phone Number: Fax: 212-931-8121 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SholomFried Tracy Raymond Timothy Johnson Theresa Sparber N/A Alexis Philips Donte Herman N/A Laura Hanrahan Joseph Stewart Michelle Phillips *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable (School) Teacher (School) Teacher Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eric Markiewicz DubelkiCalero Eloina Cuautha Alicia Pica Bauza Mildred Ventura Luz Contreras Carol Hessler (School) Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent (School) Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to prepare students for independent living and thinking in a safe, respectful, and therapeutic environment that promotes social and academic development. Our goal is to facilitate the development of educated, well-rounded students who are excited about learning and are enthusiastic, confident, and inspired to realize their highest potential. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 721M is located at 250 West Houston Street in the West Village area of Manhattan. 721M is a New York City Department of Education school program within District 75 that serves 175 students between 10.9 through 21 years of age. In addition to our main site on West Houston Street, we have two inclusion programs at Chelsea and at Harvest Collegiate High Schools. We also have a site at the District 75 Office, at 400 First Avenue with one class each of 12:1:1 and 12:1:4 students, and a new site (as of September 2018) that houses three classes of 6:1:1 and three classes of 12:1:4 students. The majority of our students are classified as having intellectual disabilities. We also have a small number of students classified with autism, learning disabilities, multiple disabilities, and emotional disabilities. Approximately 165 students are mandated for services in 12:1:1 classes. Of these students, approximately 85 students currently participate in work-site instruction during a portion of the school day. 27 students are mandated for 6:1:1 classes, another 36 students are mandated for 12:1:4 classes along with another 21 students who receive instruction in Inclusion Programs. All students have Individualized Education Programs (IEP) which include academic, social-emotional, support service and related service mandates as needed. Our school is a collaborative working and learning environment where on-going professional development and teacher leadership are promoted and encouraged.Our staff works as a team to share and focus their insights and energies. The Individualized Education Plan (IEP) is developed in consultation with parents and students to identify instructional goals and support systems students need to successfully make the transition from school to life in the community and the world of work Out teachers facilitate different avenues of learning that empower students to take ownership of their learning and make choices in their learning process. Students play an active role in planning for their future. They make informed choices by participating in a variety of integrated and inclusive environments where they acquire important social and vocational skills. Our primary school goal is to deliver an educational program that meets the academic, social, and behavioral needs of individual learners in an inclusive way, providing an education that fits the child rather than the child trying to be fitted to the program. We strive to facilitate the development of highly educated, well-rounded students who are excited about learning; children who are enthusiastic, confident and inspired to realize their highest potential. We believe that students learn best when the content is meaningful and instruction reflects their interests and capabilities. We strive for active participation and first hand experiences as the means for our students to reach high standards of excellence. This is accomplished through joint collaboration, planning, and open communication. Our school is a physically and emotionally safe, positive, student-centered climate that nurtures problem solving and encourages risk-taking as part of the learning process Our teachers facilitate different avenues of learning, empowering students to make choices in their learning process, which we believe creates an environment where everyone can succeed. As an organization, we have continued to work very hard to improve our instructional programs in a manner that provides the most meaningful access for all learners. We combine traditional educational methodologies with 2018-19 CEP 10  adaptations and/or modifications, to provide stimulating instruction for all students. This promotes a positive movement towards meeting the Common Core Standards of college\career readiness and employment. Our work is predicated on a set of principles and beliefs that include:  Embedding best practices  Engaging in Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports  Establish a culture at 721M based on providing continuously improving services which are responsive to the needs of all students  Encouraging the commitment of all staff to self-evaluate as the basis for school improvement  Providing academic rigor that is consistent at all levels, and that classroom activities are challenging, engaging and purposeful  Provide staff with appropriate and comprehensive professional development Student attendance for the 2017-2018 school year was approximately 87%. Our student population consists of 121 males and 68 females. More than half of the students’ ethnicity is identified as Hispanic (94 students) followed by African American (62 students), Asian (18 students) and Caucasian 13 students) and other (2 students). English Language Learners make up approximately 50% of our student population. Students are empowered to be self-advocates by engaging in a variety of planning sessions and by exercising their power of choice throughout their school day. This process is complemented by continuous communication between home and school throughout the school year and encourages parents to grow as advocates for their sons and daughters. 721M has developed many successful partnerships with community-based organizations that heighten student learning and the arts. Our work-sites are housed at Housing Works, Caring Community, Goodwill, VA Hospital, Greenwich House, Riverside Rehab Residence, Mott Street Senior Center, New York Public Library, New York Eye and Ear Hospital, TJ Max, 7-Eleven, Burlington House, US Department of Labor, Office of People with Development Disabilities, and Community of Special Education (DOE). We also collaborate with Marquis Studios to enhance student learning (i.e., English Language Arts) through the arts. Students participate in a partnership with Laser Art Painting. P721M has also received Arts Grants from VSA Marquis Studios. For the 2018 – 2019 school year we have placed a greater emphasis on expanding our educational arts program for students. We plan to use the SANDI data on Teacher’s Usage that identifies the flagged IEP goals of each student in each class for the core subjects (Math, Reading, Writing, and Communication). We also plan to utilize the Standards Report from SANDI to identify the level of each student in Math, Reading, Writing, and Communication and to use the information for planning rigorous classroom instruction, SANDI sub-level student grouping during instruction, and generating academic and transitional tasks that meets the needs of each student. Data Sources: Least Restrictive Environment SANDI 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey SY 2017-18 Instructional Focus  Prior Years CEP Data   Unique Learning     NYSAA  NYSESLAT  GRTL  SSP-13 2018-19 CEP 11 Staff\Student\Parent Surveys   Vocational Assessments 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students who participate in Alternate Assessment Programs have the option of remaining in school through the age of 21 years old and receive Commencement Credentials upon graduation. These students participate in a functional curriculum aligned with the Essential Elements of the Common Core Learning Standards and Career Development and Occupational Studies Standards. Students are assessed using the Student Assessment Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) and participate in the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). They require specialized instruction which includes small group, differentiated hands-on instruction. Most students participate in a 12-month school to maintain skills and concepts learned during the school year. Students in our Inclusion Programs have the opportunity to earn credits towards a High School Diploma. Their education programs follow that of their General Education peers. These students participate in New York State Regents or portfolio process Many of our students have made movement to Least Restrictive Environment (LRE). Students have moved into new less restrictive programs such as Coop Tech, Harvest Collegiate, High School and Chelsea High School Inclusion Programs. Since September 2017, 2 students were changed from Alternate Assessment to Standardized Assessment, and during the 2017-2018 school year, 38 new students are receiving reduced (26) or terminated (12) related services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area within the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools that we have made the most progress in during the 2017-2018 school year was Collaborative teachers. As a school that believes that we can learn best from each other, we were able to ensure that 100% percent of teachers were able to inter-visit with colleagues multiple times throughout the school year, observe best practice, and bring back meaningful strategies that support their instruction and consequently positively impact student outcomes. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, the instructional focus of the school will continue to be collaborative learning and teaching. This is aligned with the element of the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools called Collaborative Teachers. It is our belief that when teachers are afforded with the opportunity to develop their skills and expertise through shared learning and growing from peers and specialists the result is a positive impact to morale, school improvement, and student achievement. This is a continuation of our focus from the 2017-2018 school year based on teacher feedback requesting that we continue this as our focus and delve deeper into opportunities to inter-visit with colleagues both within our school and around the district. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75M721 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 174 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 90.8% % Reduced Lunch 44.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 54.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 85.3% 0.6% 100.0% 29.3% 8.6% 0.0% 4 4% 8.6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2016-2017, the focus of the curriculum team was to develop units of study and support their implementation. The school surpassed the goal set that year of developing 5 units of study. Last year the focus of the team was to extend the work that the team did in 2016-2017 by reviewing, refining, and adapting the curriculum maps and units of study to meet the needs of our diverse student population. Two years ago, we embarked on a 3 year initiative to embed Thinking Maps into all instruction. as a result, the school trained two people to be "train the trainer" facilitators and have trained all staff members on using all 8 maps. Teacher observations and focus groups showed that teachers used Thinking Maps across all content areas and began to integrate them into the units of study. The team looked at student work products and teacher input to ensure all students are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks. The school’s belief of assuring access for all learners is embedded in all lesson planning. Entry points for all students are a collaborative decision-making approach that strategically focuses on the students’ learning style, interests, and readiness skills. An end of year assessment showed that the unified and coherent curriculum more consistently being implemented across classrooms. Though a number units of study have been developed, there is a need to ensure progression of skills and standards addressed enhance student thinking, provide them with more opportunities to initiate discussion with their peers, and deepen their conceptual understanding so that students demonstrate a greater sense of achievement across reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Last year's Advance data showed that there was a continued need for growth in the area of questioning and facilitating student discussion. Informal observations showed the same and teachers have requested that units of study incorporate instructional strategies that more meaningfully engage students in the learning process. We have decided that during the 2018-2019 school year, the team will continue refining or units of study in addition to creating new units of study with the revised focus being embedding into those units from the start. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, the curriculum team at 721M will collaboratively refine the prior year's units of study and create 4 more units of study that meet 90% of the expectations listed within a 721M unit of a study criteria checklist. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a checklist that delineates expectations and criteria for what refining the units of study will include (with a focus on student discussion protocols and question and answer stems). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Oct 2018 Principal Create an ongoing schedule of curriculum team meetings in which teachers use protocols to focus the units of study using the checklist criteria. Teachers Develop and implement a year long calendar for the continuance of refinement of the units of study and performance assessment task. Teachers Assistant Principal Curriculum Team Principal Assistant Principal Curriculum Team Principal Assistant Principal Curriculum Team Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 At the end of each unit of study, teacher cohorts will reflect on the successes and challenges of the unit of study, collectively analyze student participation in discussion using the unit of study checklist, and develop next steps to go even deeper. Teachers Nov 2018 Principal Jan 2019 Assistant Principal April 2019 Curriculum Team June 2019 Teachers Paraprofessionals Incorporate CCLS Essential Elements, Career Development and Occupational Studies Standards, Thinking Maps with a focus on Teachers Sept 2018 Principal discussion protocols and question and answer strategies as evidenced by meeting 90% of the Nov 2018 Assistant Principal Dec 2018 Curriculum Team Jan 2019 Feb 2019 2018-19 CEP 16 Send home letter of introduction to each unit of study that provides and overview of the unit and identifies key questions for the parents to discuss with their children about their learning. Mar 2019 April 2018 May 2019 June 2018 Parents Sept 2018 Principal Nov 2018 Assistant Principal Jan 2019 Curriculum Team Mar 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold a "curriculum night" meeting for parents. Administration, Lead Instructional Lead Team and our parent coordinator will be supporting planning, oversight, and presentation. We will end home letter of introduction to each unit of study that provides and overview of the unit and identifies key questions for the parents to discuss with their children about their learning. There will be workshops and trainings for parents on Thinking Maps (as a tool to use at home as well) conducted by our Thinking Maps trainers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  District 75 Field Support Liaison  721M Instructional Lead Team  Attainment Curriculum  District 75 Units of Study  Common Planning time  Allocation of per session funds from the school budget Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the curriculum team at 721M will have refined 2 units of study that meet 90% of the expectations listed within the unit of study criteria checklist as well as create two new units of study meeting the same criteria. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The unit of study criteria checklist. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 95-100% of students reported that they feel safe in the school. Also, according to the survey, approximately 87% of teachers reported that there is a need for their students to be taught to regulate their behavior, emotions, and feelings. Though the school-wide behavioral plan (PBIS) has garnered positive results, it needs to be reviewed and refined to continue to ensure that it supports the needs of all our students in the most meaningful way. After informal visits and teacher surveys, it appears that some students, staff, and parents do not have a completely clear and consistent understanding of the new behavioral expectations as delineated in the matrix. This past years’ PBIS baseline data shows that 20 % of the students are on the lowest levels – one and two. This is due to various reasons: attendance, lateness and inappropriate behavior. Also, student ownership of the behavioral system is still not consistently evident across classrooms. There needs to be opportunities for explicit teaching of how the students can self monitor their behavior as expected through the behavior system, and how this regulation, or lack thereof impacts their success as students, work interns, and employees. The students need to understand the importance and impact of absenteeism and lateness on all the domains of their lives. This is particularly important for the students’ transition to the world of work. The students need to speak to their behavior and be part of the reflective process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers at 721M will implement the school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention Supports program inclusive of teaching expectations as measured by a 30% decrease of students on Levels 1 and 2 compared to the initial baseline data. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct staff training and student assemblies to review the Positive Behavior Intervention Supports plan, school-wide behavioral expectations, behavioral matrix. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept 2018 PBIS Team Oct 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Oct. 2018 through Jun 2019 PBIS Team Principal Assistant Principal Create a calendar of PBIS events including: All Staff  PBIS kick-off event  PBIS Team meetings  Respect for All Rally and poster Students  making contest Instruction on the behavioral expectations School-wide assemblies and events   Professional Development  Parent Meetings Students Dec 2018 through Feb 2019 PBIS Team Principal Assistant Principal Jan 2019 through Jun 2019 PBIS Team Principal Assistant Principal The PBIS Committee will create lessons that the teachers will implement. Topics will include but not be limited to: Teachers Students  Behavioral expectations of the school-wide matrix.  How to regulate their behavior, emotions, and feelings.  How to avoid and de-escalate conflict. 2018-19 CEP 20   "Respect for All" Conduct monthly Positive Behavior Intervention Supports Committee meetings to review data and drive next steps. PBIS Team Oct 2018 PBIS Team Nov 2018 Principal Dec 2018 Assistant Principal Jan 2019 Feb 2019 Mar 2019 Apr 2019 May 2019 Jun 2019 Actions: Parents Oct 2018 PBIS Team through Principal Mar 2019 Assistant Principal Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 PBIS Team Principal Assistant Principal  Send informational packet about Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) to parents  Hold two parent meetings to discuss the school-wide system and how they can help students generalize the expectations at home. The PBIS team will facilitate a number of professional development workshops for faculty including the n the following topics: Teachers Paras     “What is PBIS?” "Our Matrix " "Dealing with challenging behaviors in a positive way" "PBIS: Speaking A Shared Language" 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold a "" open school" meeting for parents. Administration, curriculum team members, our dean and our parent coordinator will be supporting planning, oversight, and presentation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PBIS Committee Team members  Counselors  Teachers  Paraprofessionals  Related Service Providers  Principal  Assistant Principal  Parent Coordinator  Attendance Teacher  Social Skills Curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers at 721M will implement the school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention Supports program inclusive of teaching expectations as measured by a 20% decrease of students on Levels 1 and 2 compared to the initial baseline data. By February 2019 - Review the PBIS calendar to ascertain the status of the delivery of lessons and other activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Logs of lessons taught   Point sheets  Spreadsheet documenting students bi-weekly PBIS levels Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, more teachers took on roles and responsibilities that increased teacher ownership and collaboration in their own learning. Based on their experience, those teachers appreciated that they were provided with the opportunity to work collaboratively with their colleagues and share promising practices. According to the 2016 - 2017 Learning Environmental Survey (two years ago) 75% of teachers agreed\strongly agreed that they were provided with opportunities to work productively with colleagues in our school. Also, 69% of teachers agreed\strongly agreed that they were provided with opportunities to work productively with colleagues in other schools. Though we have increased these numbers during the 2017-2018 school year compared to previous years, we still fully believe that collaboration amongst stakeholders is a key component of building capacity, a shared focus, and staff empowerment. In the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, only approximately 50% of staff surveyed feel like they have meaningful influence of different aspects of policy and procedure and decision making at the school. Though we are please that they felt like they are collaborating more to support instruction, we would like to provide more opportunities for them to have a voice in policy and decision making at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 721M will increase the influence of teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers over school policy and decision making as measured by the formation of two new teams with representatives from the different school stakeholders participating in the school’s decision-making process and at least 85% positive response to the teacher influence question on the teacher survey. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Form an Instructional Lead Team: This team will consist of teachers to participate in the planning and making of school decisions on instruction and developing curricula. Form cross-staff teams to support decision making in school-wide Initiatives: (SIT, Learning Partners Program Positive Behavior Support Intervention Team) will be responsible for communicating a consistent message, and coordinate the efforts of the initiative Review, adapt, and disseminate protocols and inquiry process for team meetings. Ensure that there is time built in to staff schedules for ongoing team meetings and calendar meeting dates. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Community Sept\Oct 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principal School Community Oct 2018 through June 2019 Teacher Oct 2018 Principal Teams Assistant Principal Staff at our school community Coach Oct 2018 Principal through Assistant Principal Review and analyze data to ascertain the impact to our school community: mid and end year survey. Teacher Teams June 2019 Nov 2018 Principal Jan 2019 Assistant Principal Mar 2019 May 2019 Teachers Teams and the school will have an opportunity to reflect and share with the school community their outcomes. All Staff June 2018 Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 24  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Invite parents to the meetings. Honor teams in the 721M monthly Parent Newsletter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Common Planning Time built in to teachers schedule  Allocation of Per Diem funds for staff coverage  Allocation of per session money for after-school collaboration work  District 75 Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 721M will increase the influence of teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers over school policy and decision making as measured by the formation of one new team with representatives from the different school stakeholders participating in the school’s decision-making process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting protocol form and checklist Mid year staff survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our goal is that our teachers and staff members will be better prepared to deliver quality instruction that will continue to make a difference in our students’ educational experience. Our school feels strongly that the Framework for Teaching is a tool that improves teacher practices with the final outcome of greater student engagement and achievement. In order to continue to build the capacity of teachers and all pedagogical staff, the administration has created multiple opportunities for teachers and staff members to participate in meaningful professional development with the opportunity to earn CTLE hours.  A Professional Development Needs Assessment was given to all staff October, 2018  At the beginning of the year, staff are invited to sign up for District 75 and other sign up for professional development workshops  Professional Development is also offered after-school for teachers and paraprofessionals.  Professional development topics are selected based on the feedback from the professional development needs assessment from staff members as well as from Advance data.  We will also consider the following data sources: ADVANCE Data Quality Review Learning Environment survey Student test data For school year 2018 – 2019:  Questioning and Discussion Techniques (Danielson Component 3b) will be looked upon closely to ensure teachers are providing multiple opportunities for students to participate in meaningful discussion in order to increase communication data. o Professional Learning Community (PLC) teams meet weekly for common planning with time programmed within their schedules. 2018-19 CEP 26  The direct instructional supervisor and the PLC team will meet monthly to continue to build capacity through their collaboration, focusing on data and instruction, questioning and discussion techniques, planning student led activities, and sharing of best practices.  This year we currently have one new teacher who is receiving mentoring during the course of the year. However, the second year teacher who already completed their mentoring will continue to receive targeted professional support during the 2018 – 2019 school year as well. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to provide instructional opportunities for differentiated questions and discussion for students, as measured by a 10% increase in teachers of the 12:1;1 classes being rated as"Effective" in components 1e and 3b for the 2018-2019 school year compared to ratings in similar components during the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in their IPC Meeting, discussing their professional goals and the support they believe will improve their practice.in the areas of planning for questioning and discussion. (1e and 3b 12:1:1 Teachers Sept\Oct 2018 Principal Assistant Principal School leaders create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to provide instructional opportunities for differentiated questions and discussion for students as seen by a mid year review of the 12:1:1 Teachers Sept 2018-Feb 2019 Advance Data in components 1e and 3b for the first two rounds of the observations for our 12:1:1 teachers. Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Review of Advance data from 10/2018 – 1/31/2019, ensuring all teachers data for components 1e, 3b are assessed two times. Bi-monthly, administrators will meet lead teachers to discuss supports provided to teachers. Weekly Cabinet will allow administrators the opportunity to discuss professional learning and teacher progress and plan for next steps. Teachers Oct. 2018-Jan 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Oct 2018-Feb 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Lead Teachers Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 28  Post-observation and informal conferences will afford administrators the opportunity to confer with teachers and collaborate on improving and adjusting teacher practice Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in Professional Development sessions offered by District 75 and the school. Teachers will document the relationship and application of the professional development as it relates to planning for questioning and discussion. Teachers Oc 2018-May 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 12:1:1 Teachers Paras Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Develop a form to document the professional development relationship to as it relates to planning for questioning and discussion. Administration and 12:1:1 Teachers Sept 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Observational Cycles including face to face feedback connected to 1e and 3b in addition to other identified growth areas. 12:1:1 Teachers and Paraprofessionals Provide training in Inquiry Based Cycles of Learning 12:1:1 Staff Inquiry Based Cycles of Learning Staff Cycle 1: October to December Cycle 2: January to February Cycle 3: March to April Cycle 4: May to June (Analyzing SY 17-18 Data). Professional Learning Community Teams will meet twice a month to focus on the Cycles of Learning and their problem of practice that is connected to components 1e and 3b. Professional Learning Community (PLC) teams meet weekly for common planning with time programmed within their schedules. The direct supervisor and the PLC team will meet monthly to continue to build capacity through their collaboration, focusing on data and instruction, questioning and discussion techniques, planning student led activities, and sharing of best practices. Students Review the data and analyze the pedagogical impact. Teachers Oct 2018 Principal through June 2019 Oct 2018 through June 2019 Oct 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principal LPP Team Principal Assistant Principal through June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Oct. 2018 - June 2019 LPP Team Principal Assistant Principal Oct. 2018 through Jun 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Oct 2018 LPP Team 2018-19 CEP 29 Annually, teachers will share their learning and experiences with their colleagues as well as with parents\guardians including successes and challenges. Parents June 2019 Teachers Guardians All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will present at a parent meeting to showcase the inquiry work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers schedules are all aligned to allow for common planning times each school day.  We will allocate Per Diem Coverage funds to support any professional development sessions that are full day and require substitutes to be hired. .  PD Documentation Forms   Cycle of Learning Protocols LPP Team and LPP Facilitator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to provide instructional opportunities for differentiated questions and discussion for students as seen by a mid year review of teacher observation write ups and the Advance data reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teacher lesson plans  Teacher observation write-ups  Advance data reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Express more specifically the school's priority needs and areas of focus with respect to the Framework Element for Strong Family and Community Ties. Include the specific aspects of parental engagement and participation that will be the focus of the school's initiatives. The partnership between school and home is critical to the progressive growth and development of the students. Though there has been a steady growth in parent involvement over the last couple of years, it is important that we continue to increase parent engagement in all facets of our school. Review of the data from both the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 Learning Environment Surveys showed that 50%-60% out 178 families never participated, volunteered or assisted in any school-wide event. like to increase their communication with their child's teacher and other members of the school community. The parent participation data based on attendance at the events and activities below shows that 23 parents participated in one parent workshop or event, 22 parents participated in 2-5 parent workshops or events, and 14 parents participates in 6 or more parent workshops or events during the 2017-2018 school year. We need to motivate more parents to participate but to also individually attend more meetings, events and activities. Throughout the course of the 2017-2018 school year:  10-34 parents\guardians attended Parent Association meetings  Range of 12-44 parents\guardians attended the various parent\guardian workshops offered by the school (average of 22) The workshop titles offered (with number of participants in parenthesis) included: IDNYC (10)  Come and Find Out What's New This Year (31)  What is Medicaid Service Coordination (26)  Planning Your Child's Future (26)   Transition Information Session (44)  Occupational/Physical Information session (25)   Culinary Arts Open House (26)  Title 111 Musical Event Presentation in partnership with Marquis Studios (9 Speech/Language Department Presentation (31) 2018-19 CEP 32  Other Parent Events:  41 parents\guardians attended the OPWDD Front Door Session  47 parents\guardians attended the transition fair at P138  68 parents\guardians attended the Fall parent-teacher conferences  56 parents\guardians attended the Summer parent-teacher conferences (weather was very bad) A Parent Interest Survey was disseminated in June 2018. The results show that the parents would also like workshops such as Adolescent Sexuality and Cyber-Bullying. It was also noted that some parents have childcare or work commitments that interfere with their participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent/guardian participation at school activities including Parent Association meetings, workshops, parent-teacher conferences and other school-based events during the 2018-2019 school year will increase by 20% overall compared to parent participation at similar events during the 2017-2018 school year as evidenced by the attendance documents of the events. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Introductory kick-off meeting for parents to meet and greet school leaders and and staff with a focus on parents of ELLs. Parents Sept 2018 Parent Coordinator Guardians Oct 2018 Principal Use motivational strategies such as attendance certificates, celebrations for attendance and providing related materials, showcase student work and events. Develop and distribute a parent/guardian needs assessment survey regarding parental trainings/workshops, school/community-based activities, and volunteer opportunities. Develop and disseminate a meeting/workshop/activities calendar to the parents\guardians. AP Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers Parent Coordinator SLT Principal Aisstant Principal Sept 2018 Parent Coordinator Principal Paretents Guardians November 2018- June 2019 Sept\Oct 2018 Parents Guardians Families Parents, Guardians Families Ensure that the needs assessment survey, calendar, and other informational material is translated into Spanish and Chinese to support the needs of the parents for whom English is not their native language. Plan and implement monthly meetings/workshops/family activities based on information from the parent/guardian needs assessment survey. Assitant Principal Teachers Parent Coordinator Principal APTeacher Paraprofessional Parent Coordinator Dean Oct 208 through Jun 2019 Parents for whom English is not their native language Parents Guardians Families Oct 2018 through Jun 2019 2018-19 CEP 34  Unit Teacher PA and SLT PBIS Team Principal AP Host two breakfasts separately; one for the male and female guardians respectively Parents April 2019 Teachers Guardians Student Council Student Leaders Principal AP Ensure that there is ongoing parental\guardian outreach regarding school, district, and community events as well student progress and accomplishments in different areas Parents Guardians Families Sept 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Association Letters will be sent home monthly reflecting student attendance of 95%-100% Parents, Guardians Oct 2018 through Jun 2019 Families School Aides Principal AP Teachers PAS (pupil acc) Principal PAS (pupil acc) Attend.Teacher Review participation data and qualitative information regarding the effectiveness of the program based end-of-year parent/guardian survey Parents, Guardians, Families Jun 2019 Parent Coordinator SLT Parent Association Unit Teacher Principal AP 2018-19 CEP 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. not applicable Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Parent Association Parent Association President Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Related Service Providers Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent/guardian participation at Parent Association meetings, workshops, conferences, and school-related events will increase by 20% compared to last year (September-January) as evidenced by attendance data and mid year parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent needs assessment pre and post surveys  Parent phone outreach logs  Attendance data from meetings and events  Parent survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 12:1:1/12:1:4 Student Needs Assessment Determination Inventory (SANDI) New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) Individual Education Program and other data collection WIlson, First Author and Go MATH data IEPGoals StudentProducts and Rubrics Pre- and Post-Tests 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 12:1:1 /12:1:4 12:1:1 /12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 Fun and Function Move to Improve GRTL Small group and one-to-one instruction during English Language Arts, instruction WILSOn Reading ProgrAM 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Daily ~~ 5 x weekly during English Language Arts 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program During school 3 times per week, during lunch; A teacher is trained as a Wilson Level II Reading Specialist. FirstAuthor Writing Curriculum gives teachers a comprehensive group of measurement tools to assess and monitor small increments in students’ writing development from scribbling to paragraph writing School: Small group, tutoring, SETSS service after school; Saturday school 2018-19 CEP 37 721M@Harvest HS 721M@Harvest HS Small group tutoring During the school day; after school Students with SETTS: Scantron, Performance Series Visual Strategies : PowerPoint, Triumph Boards, Thinking Maps 721M@Harvest HS Students with SETTS Scantron Performance Series, SANDI Manipulatives Attainment’s Common Core Curriculum Solution: Secondary English language Arts incorporates a blended approach to learning through print, manipulatives, interactive software and apps. It provides an age-appropriate consistent, engaging yet rigorous curriculum. The program includes the following two resources and materials: ● Teaching to the Standards: English Language Arts: Students are engaged in literature such as HOLES and THE OUTSIDERS which incorporates symbol- supported text. Students write opinions about what they have read. The overall objective is to engage students in fiction, non-fiction, poetry and research. Key objectives include: make a prediction, identify main idea, differentiate fact from non-fact and express an alternate ending. 2018-19 CEP 38  ● Read to Learn is a blend of life skills and language arts instruction that immerses the students in such topics as Life and SAFETY Skills and Feelings. The overall objective is to have students generalize and use reading skills plus discuss and relate skills to everyday life. Key objectives include interpreting emotions, learning safety skills across a variety of environments, put vocabulary words in sentences and biography genre studies. UNIQUE Learning System: Transition Band is being used by the worksite classes. The UNIQUE Curriculum is a standards-based curriculum specifically designed for special learners. There are monthly instructional thematic units of study, such As Feelings and appropriate social skills, which incorporate English Language Arts and transition content areas. The lessons and activities include the use of technology and the arts. Based on the needs of their students, teachers include extension 2018-19 CEP 39  Mathematics 12:1:1 /12:1:4 activities. The unit lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with significant disabilities. Collaborative Learning 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Regents Prep, Regentsprep.org, Scantron Performance Series, Epic Theater, Curriculum planning (indirect service), Scratch (Career Exploration/ Technology), Clubs Instructional Rounds (indirect service), Interactive Science Subject Area Meetings, and Grade Level Team Meetings. 721M@Harvest HS Repeated readings, chunking, pre- teaching, ELARegentsPrep 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 Student needs Assessment GRTL Small group and one-to-one instruction 2018-19 CEP 40  Determination Inventory (SANDI) Move to Improve Fun and Function during Mathematics instruction Daily~~ 5 x weekly ~~ during Mathematics instruction New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) Individual Education Program and other data collection Visual Strategies : PowerPoint, Triumph Board, Thinking Maps Manupulatives UNIQUE Learning System : The UNIQUE Curriculum is a standards-based curriculum specifically designed for special learners. There are monthly instructional thematic units of study which incorporate mathematicsand transition content areas. The lessons and activities include the use of technology and the arts. Based on the needs of their students, teachers include extension activities. We are using the UNIQUE Learning System Transition (for work-study students). The unit lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with significant disabilities. Attainment’s Common Core Curriculum Solution: Secondary Mathematics 2018-19 CEP 41  721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Small group, tutoring, SETTS 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program After school, 2 times per week; 721M@Harvest HS during lunch; Small group tutoring, one –to-one tutoring Saturdays school 721M@Harvest HS During and after school 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Students with SETTS Scantron, Performance Series 721M@Harvest HS Students with SETTS Scantron Performance series, SANDI incorporates a blended approach to learning through print, manipulatives, interactive software and apps. It provides an age-appropriate consistent, engaging yet rigorous curriculum. The program includes the following two resources and materials: Go Math: teachers are being trained. AbleNet “Focus on STEM” Classroom library and activities provides the opportunity to learn non-fiction literacy skills while gaining background knowledge in science and math GO MATH Incorporates the latest thinking in its comprehensive approach and engages digital natives with cross-platform technology. It helps teachers to differentiate instruction, building and reinforcing foundational math skills that translate from the classroom to real life. 2018-19 CEP 42  Science 12:1:1/12:1:4 Collaborative Learning 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Regentsprep.org, Scantron Performance Series, Curriculum planning (indirect service), Scratch (Career Exploration/ Technology), Clubs Inter visitation (indirect service) Interactive Math Subject Area Meetings, and Grade Level Team Meetings 721M@Harvest HS Pre-teaching, Algebra skills practice 12:1:1/12:1:4 GRTL Student needs Assessment Determination Inventory (SANDI) Fun and Function Move to Improve New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) Visual Strategies : PowerPoint, Triumph 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 Small group and one-to-one instruction during Science instruction Daily~~ 5 x weekly ~~ during Science instruction 2018-19 CEP 43  Individual Education Program and other data collection Boards, Thinking Maps 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Students with SETTS Scantron Performance series 721M@Harvest HS Benchmarks assessments UNIQUE Learning System : The UNIQUE curriculum is a standards-based curriculum specifically designed for special learners. There are monthly instructional thematic units of study which incorporate science and transition content areas. The lessons and activities include the use of technology and the arts. Based on the needs of their students, teachers include extension activities. We are using the UNIQUE Learning System Transition (for work-study students). The unit lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with significant disabilities. Attainment’s Common Core Curriculum Solution: Secondary Science incorporates a blended approach to learning through print, manipulatives, 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program After school, 2 times per week; during lunch; Saturday school 721M@Harvest HS During and after school 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Small group, tutoring, SETSS service 1 extra period, 4 days per week for 10th grade 721M@Harvest HS Small group tutoring 2018-19 CEP 44  interactive software and apps AbleNet: Focus on STEM Classroom library and activities provides the opportunity to learn non-fiction literacy skills while gaining background knowledge in science and math Structured Teaching and Questioning in Science Collaborative Learning 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Regents Prep, Regentsprep.org, Scantron Performance Series, Curriculum planning (indirect service), Scratch (Career Exploration/ Technology), Clubs Instructional Rounds (indirect service), Interactive Science Subject Area Meetings, and Grade Level Team Meetings 721M@Harvest HS 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies 12:1:1 /12:1:4 Student needs Assessment Determination Inventory (SANDI) Pre- teaching, chunking, interactive writing 12:1:1 /12:1:4 GRTL Move to Improve Fun and Function New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) Individual Education Program and other data collection Visual Strategies : PowerPoint, Thinking Maps, Triumph Boards, Brain Pop Passport to Social Studies, the NYCDOEsocial studies curriculum, Passport aligns to the NYC Social Studies Scope & Sequence and integrates the New York State Social Studies Framework to provide models for effective and engaging social studies teaching and learning. UNIQUE Learning System : The UNIQUE Curriculum is a standards-based curriculum specifically designed for special learners. There are monthly instructional thematic units of 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 Small group and one-to-one instruction during Social Studies instruction Daily~~ 5 x weekly ~~ during Social Studies instruction 2018-19 CEP 46  721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Students with SETTS Scantron Performance series 721M@Harvest HS Benchmark assessments 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Small group, tutoring, SETSS service 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program During school, 3 times per week; during lunch 721M@Harvest HS Small group and one to one tutoring 721M@Harvest HS During and after school study which incorporatesocial studies and transition content areas. The lessons and activities include the use of technology and the arts. Based on the needs of their students, teachers include extension activities. We are using the UNIQUE Learning System Transition (for work-study students). The unit lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with significant disabilities District 75 Alternate Assessment: Curriculum This framework is in being developed by District 75 teachers for students with moderate to severe disabilities. It is connected to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our staff is exploring the suggested activities as extensions for the UNIQUE Curriculum. Passages: Our Middle School teachers are participatingin professional development and will pilot.. 2018-19 CEP 47  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 12:1:1/12:1:4 PBIS data, attendance data, “Get Ready to Learn” data, Functional Behavior Assessments, Behavior Insertion Plans Collaborative Learning 721M@Chelsea HS Inclusion Program Regents Prep, Regentsprep.org, Scantron Performance Series, Epic Theater, Curriculum planning (indirect service), Scratch (Career Exploration/ Technology), Clubs Instructional Rounds (indirect service), DBQ Exploration, Essay Writing Subject Area Meetings and Grade Level Team Meetings. 721M@Harvest HS Pre-teaching, chunking, interactive writing, Repeated readings 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 12:1:1/12:1:4 GRTL Guidance Counselor: As mandated on I.E.P.’s and as needed Move to Improve Fun and Function One-to-one/small group 2018-19 CEP 48  721M@Chelsea School Inclusion Program Students with Counseling mandates and “at risk” 721M@Harvest HS Students with Counseling mandates and “at risk” Counseling : Individual and groups sessions, as mandated and as needed, for supporting students socially and emotionally in the classroom to help them meet their academic goals and objectives in the area of social/emotional skills. Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS Program ) : Behavior intervention support program for students to motivate and reinforce pro-social skills to support achievement of academic goals. At Risk Health Services: Clubs : C.H.A.M.P.S.: Basketball, flag football, volleyball, floor hockey, cheerleading and fitness clubs “Get Ready to Learn” Sensory Program : A daily preparatory therapy program for the classroom designed for all populations including students with multiple handicaps, developmental disabilities, and autistic spectrum disorders. The program is designed to calm students, increase their Over the course of the school day After each period points are taken, bi-weekly Rewards Days Clubs Small group and whole group (teams) Monday – Friday 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM instruction Whole group participation, classroom Monday and Thursday 3:00 PM to 5:00 PM Daily ~~ 5 x weekly Large and small groups 2018-19 CEP 49  n-going over the course of the year 721M@Chelsea School Inclusion Program During the school day and as needed 721M@Harvest HS During the school day and as needed alertness, and assist them in being able to self-regulate prior to classroom learning. 721M@Chelsea School Inclusion Program Extra Individual or group counseling for students with crisis 721M@Harvest HS One to one and small group therapy Student Assemblies and Classes: Including but not limited to Cyberbullying, PBIS Program, Code of Conduct, Respect for All 721M@Chelsea School Inclusion Program Counseling Response to Intervention- Tier 2 and Tier 3 721M@Harvest HS Counseling 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4 STH 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 51  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 52  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 53  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 54  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 55  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. M721, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. M721 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 57  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. M721, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 58  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 59  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 60  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 61  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 62  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 721M serves 182 students in special education between the ages of 11 and 21 years old. The entire student population of our school is certified as students with varying handicapping conditions. Each student's instructional program is driven by his/her Individualized Education Program (IEP) including his/her bilingual/ENL Only classifications and staffing ratios. Students are placed in the least restrictive environments (LRE) that are commensurate with their cognitive needs. Although we are an un-graded program in the traditional sense, we use age-grade equivalents and place students according to their age/functional levels. Throughout the school day, instruction is differentiated according to the academic and cognitive needs of each student. Our English Language Learners (ELLs) make up approximately 45% of our total school population. Our allotted Title III funds will be utilized for our 18-week, Title III After school Arts/Music Program (mid-January through April 2019) in which students will research and experience multicultural percussion and drumming. This program will serve one group of 12 ELLs (12:1:1). All ELLs in 721M will be eligible to participate, but will be chosen on a first-come, first-served basis. Letters will be sent home in English and in the families' native languages to survey interest and determine enrollment. The class will meet on Mondays and Wednesdays from 3:00 PM to 5:00 PM. One licensed ENL teacher and a Spanish-speaking paraprofessional will work with students after school hours to focus on enhancing literacy skills using the arts. The program will be supervised by a 721M administrator. The administrator will be compensated for 1.5 hours each session, after her regular day has ended. During weeks 1-9 of the program, students will meet once a week with 721M staff and the teaching artist from Marquis Studios. From weeks 10-18 the program will meet twice a week. Day two will focus on reinforcing materials learned in day one with the teaching artist. The aim of the program is to increase the students’ vocabulary skills, interpersonal communication, speaking and listening skills, social skills such as the ability to follow directions and collaborative learning experiences through music. During this program, the language of instruction will be English, with native (Spanish) language support provided by the paraprofessional. Our ELL students will benefit from this program because it facilitates the acquisition of English language skills through authentic activities and different learning modalities which are not always experienced in the classroom. In addition to the after-school sessions with the teaching artist from Marquis Studios, the group will meet on one Saturday in January or March from 9:30 - 1:30. During this time, students, staff and parents will take a trip to a multicultural event in the city. This will be a selected cultural institution of either El Museo del Barrio or Lincoln Center where students will have the chance to see a musical/dance performance. This opportunity will enhance the students' understanding of music and dance, thus supporting their studies during the after-school sessions. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information These students will benefit from an enrichment program that focuses on the improvement of English language skills. The instructional program will encompass a student-centered theme which will incorporate hands-on and multi-sensory activities that will culminate in a final performance. The project(s) will reinforce the skills that are taught during the instructional day and will be aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) including Extentions and AGLI’s. Focus questions and/or discovery activities incorporated into each session will require students to talk about expressive attributes (expressing a feeling/emotion or character traits) they are curious about and/or are important to them (Krashen, 2006). The teacher will provide pictorial and experiential tasks for our more challenged stu dents. Providing these instructional supports will expand each student’s comprehension and acquisition of English skills. Teacher-made assessments,rubrics and checklists will be used to gauge student progress. English will be the language of instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Staff and students have learned skills in various areas of the arts (photography, drama, dance/movement) in the past 721M Title III After school Programs. In order to continue expanding the program, we will secure professional development services from Marquis Studios during the course of our after school program. In collaboration with the 721M Title III teacher, a consultant/teaching artist will work with the 721M staff (all staff members are invited to attend) for three sessions from 3:00 PM to 5:00PM while students participate in another program at no cost to the Title III Program. These Professional Development sessions will be held on three Wednesdays throughout the program. The topics of the sessions will include areas such as team building skills, appreciation of and hand on engagement with music and enhancement of literacy skills through the arts. This professional development will focus on basic and some advanced arts techniques. The professional development will enable the teaching staff to deepen the students' linguistic and conceptual understanding of other art skills. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 65  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: The program will be introduced by an administrator during one of our Parent Association Meetings (November 2018). Official Title III invitation letters in English and the parents' home languages will be sent prior to the beginning of the program. On a select Tuesday in January before the program starts, the parent coordinator will hold a meeting during the school day for parents to better inform them of the program. Staff members who speak the parents' preferred languages will be present to provide interpretation as needed. Parents will be invited to accompany their students on the Saturday excursion to the selected institution (El Museo del Barrio or Lincoln Center). During this experience, they will have the opportunity to learn alongside their students. MetroCards will be provided and the minimal cost of admission will be covered by Title III funds. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Direct Instruction: $8355.57 Professional Development: $857.81 Total: $9213.38 Purchased services Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction 1 Teacher x 18 weeks x 1 day x 2 hours x $60.65 = $2183.40 1 Teacher x 9 weeks x 1 day x 2 hour x $60.65 = $1091.70 1 Teacher x 1 Saturday x 4 hours x $60.65 = $242.60 1 Ed. Para x 18 weeks x 1 day x 2 hours x $34.73 = $1,250.28 1 Ed. Para x 9 weeks x 1 day x 2 hours x $34.73 = 625.14 1 Ed. Para x 1 Saturday x 4 hours x $34.73 = $138.92 1 Supervisor x 18 weeks x 1 day x 1.5 hours x $63.45 = $1713.15 1 Supervisor x 9 weeks x 1 day x 1.5 hours x $63.45 = $856.58 1 Supervisor x 1 Saturday x 4 hours x $63.45 = $253.80 Professional Development 1 Teacher x 3 weeks x 1 day x 2 hours x $60.65 = $363.90 1 Ed. Para x 3 weeks x 1 day x 2 hours x $34.73 = $208.38 1 Supervisor x 3 weeks x 1 day x 1.5 hour x $63.45 = $285.53 2018-19 CEP 66 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $0 Musical equipment to incorporate into instruction through Marquis Studios. $1304.94 Percussion/Instruments- (Repinque, Caixa, Surdo) $323.60 Percussion accessories-(samba beaters,belts) $219.53 Minor percussion instruments-(Maracas, shakers) $91.08 Books/DVD (Drum Fun, Together in Rhythm) $290.00x 1 ipad Wi-Fi 32GB 6" Gen to assist with individual needs of ELLs $17.47 Plastic storage box for instruments $44.00 Miscellaneous supplies for projects(paper, composition notebooks, scissors, etc.) $0 Metrocards: 12 parents x $5.50 x 1 =$66 Saturday, 12 students x $5.50X 1=$66 Refreshments for parents: $250 Admissions for Saturday excursion: $480 $12,366  High quality staff $0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2290.62 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $0 $132 $730 TOTAL $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Manhattan Occupational Training Center Borough Manhattan School Number 721 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sholom Fried Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Carpenzano Teacher/Subject Area Dawn Toth ELA and Mathematics Teacher/Subject Area Robert Frost/ENL Related-Service Provider Gail Novick/Speech Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Carol Hessler Coach N/A School Counselor Anthony Acosta Parent Maria Arzu Parent Coordinator Madeline Nieves Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 68  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 178 Total number of ELLs 77 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 43.26% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): X If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. N/A School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) SELECT ONEYesNo K 1 2 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 0 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 0 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 0 2018-19 CEP 69  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Every student is assessed with Student Assessment Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) during the fall and spring of each school year. The fall administration of the SANDI provides a baseline, and the spring administration provides summative results. The Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST) is also administered as a formative assessment at two mid-year points. The SANDI results drive and inform the development of students' Individualized Educational Program (IEP) goals and objectives in the areas of reading, writing, math and communication. Each teacher who teaches the specific discipline takes data to determine the mastery of the goals/objectives. Students who are in standardized assessment classes participate in Regents and other State tests. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers are provided with school-based and district professional development for all testing. Teachers meet in cohorts to review data to plan instruction, students and assessments. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school assesses students through their performance in the classroom using checklists and NYSESLAT and NYSAA scores. The Fall SANDI is the baseline for the two FAST benchmark assessments. StudentS' IEP goals are tracked and reviewed on a regular basis through teacher made assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The review of success for each student is completed through cohort meetings at which staff members review and discuss student work, mastery of IEP goals and objectives (both annuals and triennials), and SANDI scores. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently, our school serves students in Grades 6-12. b. TBE program. If applicable. All ELL students take the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) annually. The IEP and various ATS reports (RLAT) are utilized to ensure that all eligible students participate in NYSESLAT testing. Due to their disabilities, students referred to 721M are exempt from standardized testing and participate in the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). The majority of our population is classified as being intellectually disabled (ID). We serves a smaller number of students classified as autistic (AU), multiply handicapped (MH) or learning disabled (LD). A number of our students have secondary and tertiary classifications. Since we are considered an Alternate Assessment program, we rarely have students scoring in the expanding or commanding levels of language proficiency. At this time, there are no ELLs participating in standardized assessment with the exception of the NYSESLAT. Given their cognitive abilities, the majority of our students fall in the beginning level of language proficiency. Sixty ELLs received full scores with results falling in the entering level. Of the seventy-nine students, five of our ELL students scored above the entering level due to their higher cognitive/academic skills. Nine of our ELL students received invalid/no scores due to their cognitive/physical deficits. There were two students who were not attending school in the past year. One was not in attendance during the testing period, and 2018-19 CEP 70  the other was newly admitted to the NYC system and scored at the beginning level on the LAB-R. Therefore, we have no scores for these students. Current and past NYSESLAT results reflect a similar trend. The overall scores show strengths in the areas of listening and speaking, the modalities that are less cognitively demanding. The lower scores in reading and writing are also predictable and are indicative of the students' disabilities. This pattern has been consistent for the past seven years, and we anticipate seeing the same pattern next year. Most of our students can complete the listening and speaking portions of the NYSESLAT; but due to their cognitive disabilities, they are unable to read and/or write on the appropriate proficiency level (or not at all) in either language. This often results in invalid or no scores which is indicative of their disabilities. Should any of our students pass the NYSESLAT, we would have IEP conferences for them so that their IEP's would reflect their new status. However, we would still provide support via CR Part 154s.. c. DL program. If applicable. ENL teachers share information at cohort meetings , IEP meetings and after school professional development. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have two NYS certified ENL teachers who serve ELL students through a push-in/pull-out model. They plan collaboratively with classroom teachers to provide integrated ENL instruction through content areas. Additionally, they provide stand-alone ENL instruction through a specifically tailored schedule. Students are grouped heterogeneously, some in self-contained classes, some in departmentalized classes. The departmentalized classes move from one teacher to another based on the content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At this time, we do not have a TBE program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At this time, we do not have a DL program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We provide the maximum number of minutes of ENL given the staffing, geographical and student-to-staff ratio constraints of our program. ENL teachers collaboratively plan with monolingual classroom teachers to maximize the quality of ENL instruction. Because we do not have a TBE program, HLA instruction is not provided. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 71  The instructional program is adapted and differentiated to meet the functional and linguistic needs of the students. In order to meet the student’s linguistic and academic needs, we continue to expand our literacy program by aligning it with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and/or Alternate Grade Level Indicators (AGLI's) for science and social studies. HLA/ENL literacy activities are extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas by combining a theme-based approach with read alouds, reading/writing workshops, contextualization and multi-sensory approaches, small group instruction, infusion of the arts and the use of technology tools. We continue to use the UNIQUE Learning System Transition Program. UNIQUE is a dynamic, standards-based, research-based program, specifically designed for special learners. It contains monthly thematic units of study that include comprehensive activities for all five core competencies (reading, writing, mathematics, science and social studies). The UNIQUE materials have been designed with SymbolStix graphics (comprehensible input via visual supports), and each unit has three defined levels (from maximum support to modified content) of differentiated tasks to accommodate the learning styles of our students. Work-study teachers utilize the Transition Band of the program. The Transition Band focuses on skill learning that will be needed by students when exiting the school (graduating), entering the work setting and living with optimal independence. Additionally, the UNIQUE Program also has the option of tracking student progress on-line with monthly checkpoints. This past year, we piloted Attainment’s Common Core Curriculum Solution: Secondary English Language Arts for departmentalized and self-contained classrooms which incorporates a blended approach to learning through print, manipulatives, interactive software and apps. It provides an age-appropriate, consistent, engaging and rigorous curriculum. In addition, we also implement AbleNet's STEM Curriculum (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) which teachers adapt and which is accessible by our ELL students. We continue to use multimedia to enhance and support the development of English and native language skills. Teachers further differentiate instruction by creating more interactive, hands-on, and age/grade appropriate materials and activities facilitating the use of AAC devices and the utilization of computer equipment (ie. Triumph Board) and/or software. Native language books and materials are available in classrooms. Sheltered Language instruction is also encouraged throughout our learning process. We also rolled out the use of Thinking Maps in 2016-17 and plan to continue to use them to support instruction and student learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Although we do not have a TBE program, students are informally evaluated in their home languages by alternate placement paraprofessionals (when applicable). 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The primary factor we consider when differentiating instruction for students is their cognitive abilities and learning styles. We differentiate instruction based on individual student needs, such as visual and gestural supports and adapting text. The curricula we utilize are specifically designed for students with special needs. Since our classes are ungraded, we place students according to their age/functional levels, and instruction is differentiated accordingly. When we admit SIFEs or newcomer students, they are also placed according to their functional levels. Students are provided with visual supports, interactive/hands-on activities, and other ENL strategies. Paraprofessionals who are bilingual provide additional native language (NL) support to ELLs. Students are grouped and given differentiated work depending on their cognitive and language levels regardless if they are SIFEs, Newcomers, Developing, or Long Term. ELL students who test on the commanding level are graduated from ENL but will still receive services for 90 minutes per week for at least two years. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The materials used are either teacher created or adapted from the UNIQUE Program (ELA, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies), Attainment Curriculum (ELA, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies), and STEM Curriculum (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) materials to better meet the needs of our ELLs. Worksheets are differentiated and books are adapted to appropriate grade/levels to also meet the needs of our students. Materials are content specific, then scaffolded to meet the needs of ELLs. The Common Core Learning Standards based lessons are technology enriched using SMART boards, computers, and iPads to support ELLs. Manipulatives/hands-on materials are used to enhance instruction and provide tactile learners with access to instruction. Auditory and visual supports are used throughout lessons. The school curricula provides content-specific materials that are designed to accelerate ELLs' learning. Presently the school provides stand alone ENL 2018-19 CEP 72  services. We also rolled out the use of Thinking Maps in 2016-17 and plan continue to use them to support instruction and student learning during the current school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All students are placed as per their IEP mandates. Students are scheduled in an attempt to meet all mandates according to their IEPs. The flexibility among staff creates an environment where make-ups are easily attainable. As appropriate, students are moved to less restrictive environments, such as on of our inclusion programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Structured Methods in Literacy Education (SMiLE) is being piloted with targeted students. The program is a "language to literacy" phonics-based program designed to teach reading to students with autism, moderate to severe language delays, processing issues and/or physical delays. SMiLE has demonstrated success in teaching literacy to students who were unable to retain phonemic awareness using a traditional method of instruction. SMiLE is divided into five modules and begins with sound-symbol relationships. It then moves on to words including nouns, verbs, colors, and numbers and then further along by introducing sentences and ultimately stories. In content areas, lessons are scaffolded by ENL teachers. Vocabulary is pre-taught before the lessons are conducted. The use of home language is also used to help students grasp concepts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We intend to expand the SMiLE program by training more staff members and increasing the student groups who participate in this program. We will also be implementing the Wilson Reading Program for students whom it is appropriate. We will also continue to support our staff in the use of Thinking Maps by hosting regular in-house professional development workshops. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We did not have a TBE program last year. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our programs ~~ before, during and after school programs (C.H.A.M.P.S. Athletic program, Chapter 683-summer program) ~~ are available to ELL students. We will continue to offer the Title III Program that integrates language and the arts. ELLs are represented in all of these programs and are given the same opportunities to flourish as students who are not ELLs. Teachers of these programs are also aware that they are teaching ELLs and are given the proper training by our ENL teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELLs participate in curriculum designed and adapted in all content areas (UNIQUE, Attainment, AbleNet's STEM). Smart boards are used extensively in all classes. Our curriculum implements manipulatives, software and apps to support instruction. Each classroom has at least one computer for student use, and teachers also have iPads to utilze with students individually. Teachers have differentiated materials and differentiated apps, such as NEWSLA. These programs allow for the teaching of different levels of ELLs. All instructional materials are relevant for ELL subgroups (Newcomers, Developing, Long Term, Former). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school only contains ENL classes. For bilingual students, we pair our bilingual paraprofessionals with the ELLs to help shelter their home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All services for students are IEP driven and carefully monitored through multiple sources. Our school ensures this by placing each student in appropriate age-leveled classes. All curricula are adapted and modified for all ELL populations and 2018-19 CEP 73  subgroups. Teaching strategies include flexible groupings, the use of Thinking Maps, various graphic organizers, and collaborative learning. All ELLs participate in curriculum designed and adapted in all content areas (UNIQUE, Attainment, AbleNet's STEM). Triumph boards are used extensively in all classes. Our curriculum implements manipulatives, software and apps to support instruction. Each classroom has at least one computer for student use, and teachers also have iPads to utilze with students individually. Teachers have differentiated materials and differentiated apps, such as NEWSLA. These programs allow for the teaching of different levels of ELLs. All instructional materials are relevant for ELL subgroups (Newcomers, Developing, Long Term, Former). 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Incoming ELL students are able to start school in the summer (Chapter 683). New ELL students are not segregated. They are included in all school functions. Our Parent Coordinator, and one of our Guidance Counselor, are bilingual and are part of the 721M Intake Team. In addition, we also have a bilingual speech teacher on staff. These professionals are easily accessible to the students throughout the year including during students' new transition into our school. Parents are invited to participate on our committees and are given workshops throughout the school year. Through our Title III Program and other activities and events such as District 75 Borough-Based Family Days, ELL students and their families are fully embraced by the school community. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As an alternate assessment program, at the current time, we do not offer language electives. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Currently, our school only features an ENL program. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 74  Teachers are trained in the NYS and Federal laws pertaining to ELL and District 75 students. ENL teachers are sent to numerous professional development provided by the NYC DOE and District 75. ENL teachers turnkey the information learned through numerous school-based professional development sessions. These workshops include administration, special education teachers, attendance teacher, physical education teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, secretaries, and the parent coordinator. Staff members are trained in Jose P, ELL scaffolding, mandated ENL service minutes, co-teaching content areas by using ESL methodologies, and incorporating Common Core Learning Standards and the arts. ENL teachers are trained in Common Core Learning Standards aligned with instruction through workshops provided by the NYCDOE and District 75. They are also trained alongside special education teachers and coverage teachers through bi-weekly cohorts that encompass all areas of Common Core Learning Standards. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We provide opportunities to staff to attend all ELL workshops provided by the NYCDOE and District 75. Guidance Counselors train staff members on dealing with the transitions between school grades. ELL students in the middle school are then introduced to the high school teachers and students through a new pilot program that we are implementing this year. Different high school students, teachers, and paraprofessionals will meet weekly with the middle school class to help ease with transition into High School. ENL teachers participate in professional development that encompasses the teaching of ELL students. The ENL teachers turnkey the information to staff members through cohorts and by presenting professional development seminars during staff development days. The focus is on strategies and integrating language and content into instruction. During Professional Learning Communities (PLC's) and informal meetings, the ENL teachers share their best practices for co-teaching. Attendance records are maintained. 2018-19 CEP 75  Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Each year, an IEP calendar is created and posted in our General Office. All staff members ~~ teachers, related service providers, support service providers and 1:1 paraprofessionals ~~ who serve each student are invited to the student's IEP conference. During conferences, staff members discuss academic and linguistic progress with all in attendance. If an interpreter is needed for a parent, this service is arranged before the conference. Our school individually meets with the parents or guardians of English Language Learners at least once a year, in addition to Parent-Teacher Conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians to discuss the goals of the program, their children's language development progress, their children's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 2018-19 CEP 76  12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances 2018-19 CEP 78  are on kept School Name: Formal records of a parents' preferences for their children's ELL programs are retained in the students' permanent record. Parent outreach phone logs, meeting anecdotals/minutes, and attendance sheets are maintained. Copies of letters to parents file. In addition, parents are always welcome and encouraged to inquire about our program before their children attend our school. As part of our intake protocol, we encourage parents to visit the school before they make any decisions regarding their children’s placements at 721M. During these visits, the parents and children meet staff members who will work with them. When parents make their final decisions, we request that they go through an orientation where the program is reviewed; and they meet other key staff members (i.e., Bilingual Parent Coordinator, Administrators, teachers, Dean, counselors, nurse, and office personnel). Bilingual staff members are always available to meet with parents to answer questions or discuss any concerns they may have about our program. All parents are encouraged to attend the 721M Parent Association (PA). Through a yearly parent election, several parents are elected to the 721M School Leadership Team (SLT). Our Parent Coordinator makes systemic and consistent outreach to families for all school events and activities. During the year, the PA conducts an interest inventory/survey in order to address the interests and needs of our parents. The PA collaborates with the Parent Coordinator to plan and implement workshops and/or secure speakers based on parental interest. Workshops include, but are not limited to, the following topics: the transition process, curriculum and assessment, Medicaid Service Coordination, Annual Reviews, Travel Training, securing guardianship for children, Front Door, supporting skills at home, sex education, positive behavior strategies and crisis management. The Young Adult Institute (YAI), Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD), Sinergia, The Lower East Side Union and Lawyers for the Public Interest are all community-based organizations that present workshops at our school. Our relationship with these organizations have facilitated other workshop venues for parents. Workshops will be added based on parent suggestions and/or consensus. Interpretation services are available for parents at all meetings including IEP meetings and other school events. School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sholom Fried Title Principal 75M721 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/01/17 N/A 10/01/17 N/A N/A N/A Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 721M Sholom Fried Carol Hessler Madeline Nieves Elizabeth Carpenzano Maria Arzu Robert Frost/ENL Dawn Toth/ELA and Mathematics Melissa Scala N/A Anthony Acosta N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 79  2018-19 CEP 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75M721 School Name: 721M Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elizabeth Carpenzano ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. For the purpose of clear communication with families, we establish each parent's language preference during the intake process. At the beginning of the year, 721M conducts an ATS/SESIS survey in order to ascertain the home languages of all students. As the Parent Coordinator places calls to each student's home, she also informally surveys parents to ensure that they are receiving correspondence in their homelanguages. In addition, parents must be contacted for their children’s I.E.P. Conferences. Each invitation letter asks the parent to indicate if he/she needs an interpreter for the conference. Upon receipt of that request, the teacher must make the appropriate arrangements to have an interpreter available on the date of the conference. The HLIS is used to determine family preferences for written and oral communications from the school. Blue Emergency Contact cards are provided in English and Spanish. For families who need translation in other languages, a staff member who speaks their home language translates the content. This provides further information on family language needs. 2018-19 CEP 81  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Tagalog, and Bambara x x x 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September 2015) translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 721M Parent Handbook Parent Newsletters (four times a year) Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements (November and March) IEP Conference Invitations (ongoing throughout the year) New York State Testing/NYSAA Announcements (September) Title III Afterschool Information/Permission Slips (as determined by dates of program) 2018-19 CEP 82  student curriculum letter (September) special school events/activities notices (as scheduled dependent on dates of events/activities), Parent Association Meetings Invitiations (September and monthly), Parent Workshop Invitations (as scheduled dependent on dates of workshops), Parent Coordinator Borough Family Events (as scheduled dependent upon the dates of events) and other parent communication/letters/notices (as needed) Staff members provide translation of written communications, as needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent- Teacher Conferences November and March Parent Association Meetings Monthly ~~ September through June Parent Workshops As scheduled dependent upon dates of workshops Title III Parent Workshops As scheduled dependent upon dates of workshops Project ARTS Celebrations As scheduled dependent upon dates of celebrations School Leadership Committee Meetings Monthly Annual Reviews, Triennials and Re-evals Ongoing throughout the year Student Celebration Events As scheduled dependent upon dates of events Attendance Teacher Calls As needed Parent Coordinator Calls As needed Guidance Counselor Calls As needed Daily Attendance Calls Daily 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 83  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We, at 721M, fulfill the requirements of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. At present, we do not have any parents who speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language. If a parent requires a document in a language that is not readily available, we will contact the Department of Education’s Translation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Information regarding the quality and availability of interpretion services is conducted by our Parent Coordinator through a parent survey. 2018-19 CEP 84 
