2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75M751 School Name: MANHATTAN SCHOOL FOR CAREER DEVELOPMENT Principal: EWA ASTERITA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Manhattan School For Career Development 307500011751 6-12 113 East 4 th Street, NYC 10003 212.477.2090 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75M751 212.228.7095 Fax: Ewa Asterita EAsterita@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ewa Asterita Thomas Rosa Shawn Hicks Michael McNiff n/a Hailey Ortiz N/A N/A District Information Ketler Louissaint Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 400 East 1 stAvenue, NYC 10010 Klouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212.802.1500 Phone Number: 212.802.1678 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  District 75 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) KetlerLouissaint Executive Director: 400 East 1 stAvenue, NYC 10010 Klouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212.802.1500 Phone Number: 212.802.1678 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael McNiff Fiordaliza Fernandez Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5 Ewa Asterita Thomas Rosa Shawn Hicks n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/  Name CorineDickens Samantha Yarborough Tracy Yarborough Lorena Diaz YakeenDinmahamad n/a n/a n/a n/a Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent CSA n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Manhattan School for Career Development is to provide a challenging education that maintains equity, equality, and access for all students; to equip students with critical skills that promote their intellectual, social, emotional, and ethical growth thereby empowering all students to become integrated and successful citizens in an ever-changing global and digital society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Manhattan School for Career Development [MSCD or 751M] is a District 75 Program centrally located on the Lower East Side. We have several satellite sites across Manhattan, NY, including our newest addition of a middle school: MSCD Preparatory. In addition to our high school program, MSCD Career AcademyMTC, MSCD Preparatory will serve students in grades 6-8, of which some are standardized and alternately assessed. It is located at 75 Morton Street. MSCD is a culturally diverse school population, made up of dedicated professionals who are committed to instilling in each of our diverse learners the importance of education, lifelong learning, and college and career readiness. Our team nurtures and sustains a culture of collaboration, trust, learning, and high expectations, which is driven by our school of one approach and implemented through our inquiry-based model. Our approach is inclusive of all stakeholders including students, staff, parents and the local community. Collectively, we engage the entire school community and all its stakeholders in collaborating to make proactive and positive change in local, district, state and national decisions that affect the improvement of teaching and learning. Our whole child approach is driven solely by the emphasized via the Learning Partner Program, where we collaborate with other District 75 schools to share and learn best practices. We strongly believe in and value the perspectives of others, a practice which has tested and proved our connection to the vision and mission of the district. There are several parts to our school program that allow us to effectively meet the needs of our diverse student population. MSCD Preparatory MSCD Preparatory is our middle school program that provides instruction to students in grades 6-8. Facilitating rigorous instruction, we implement a school-wide curriculum map that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. As part of our program, we use data driven [EyeOnData] and evidence-based inquiry team process [ATLAS] to move students along the educational continuum. Our beliefs emphasized the whole child approach; instructions are IEP driven, tailored to the individual needs of each student. MSCD Career AcademyMTC As a secondary school program for non-diploma bound students with disabilities, MSCD’s mission is to implement a service-delivery model that will facilitate employment, training and/or community involvement. MSCD has structured a four-stage career-training sequence that systematically increases community-based internship time and independence for our students. The final phase is the Manhattan Transition Center, which offers intensive vocational training; assistance with placement into full-time employment; agency linkages; and full-time postsecondary opportunities. Manhattan Transition Center MSCD works with the following community partners to provide Community-Based Vocational Internships [CBVI] opportunities to students: Baruch College; Bellevue Hospital; Columbia University [Barnard College & Teachers College]; GMHC; Goodwill Industries; Grand Hyatt Hotel at Grand Central Station; Mount Sinai Hospital; New York University; Teacher’s Aide Training @ 138M; 7-Eleven [Bowery]; RxR Realty-Project Search. As part of this program, 2018-19 CEP 10  we partner with Co-op Tech to provide our students exposure to the learning about and earning training certificates in a field of their interest. Inclusive Education MSCD, in cooperation with the High School for Fashion Industries, Hudson High School of Learning Technologies, and Harvey Milk High School, participates in inclusion classes where our students are enrolled as standardized assessment, Regents-bound students in the community high school. The inclusionary model is based on the premise that students requiring special education services will have improved achievement if educated in the least restrictive environment, i.e. the general education classroom. Special education students in the inclusion program are designated to receive the additional support of a special education teacher and a paraprofessional in their general education classroom. Through inclusive education, our students work towards College and Career Readiness, community integration, and Social and Emotional development. Our community school partners share a mutual commitment to providing students with an ambitious and rigorous education which has proven to be a successful formula for many of our students. The District 75 inclusion model and related services provide opportunities for our students to receive education aligned to general education and main stream curricula. Students in our inclusion programs are fully immersed in community school classes and programs which ensures 100% compliance with their IEPs. Working collaboratively with our inclusion partners, we have raised the standards and bridged the achievement gap for students. MSCD has seen many successes over the years because we engage all stakeholders in planning, future goals, actions and next steps to improve student learning, teacher practice, academic results and our learning community. The buy-in from stakeholders representing all roles and perspectives in the school in the development, monitoring and refinement of our shared vision and mission for learning. Collectively, we have decided on BELIEVE as our theme for the 2018-19 school year. Our history of beating the odds and helping students to reach new heights is only possible when we all believe. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 751M serves students with disabilities that include Learning Disabilities, Intellectual Disabilities, Emotional Disabilities and Students on the Spectrum. To meet the needs of these students, class sizes are provided in 12:1:1, 8:1:1 and 6:1:1 ratios. 751M supports 45 students in inclusive education programs at the High School of Fashion Industries, Harvey Milk High School, and Hudson High School. Some of the inclusive education students participate in standardized assessments and are working towards a Regents diploma. 751M had 65 students participating in Community Based Vocational work sites, such as Mt. Sinai Hospital, Teacher's College, Gay Men Health Crisis [GMHC], New York University, Bellevue Hospital, Baruch College, Teacher’s Aide Training, and RxR Reality [Project Search]. Student needs include applying vocational and academic skills to real-world settings. Additionally, 45 of our students are English Language Learners [ELL] and receive ENL services in accordance with their IEPs. 2018-19 CEP 11  Related Services are provided to students including Speech Language Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Hearing Services, Counseling, and Audiology. Academic interventions are provided to students to ensure they have access to standardize and age level content at grade appropriate levels. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective School Leadership MSCD or 751M is an inquiry-based collaborative professional scholastic community dedicated to providing “whole child” education with challenging educational and community-based work experiences, with equity of access, to all our students, enabling them to become integrated, productive members of a global society. Team leaders and teacher teams review professional development opportunities and evaluations. The executive cabinet review the Educator’s Customized Professional Plan [ECP2] and prepare professional development based on the needs of the educators. Targeted professional development is provided to staff based on their individual feedback/needs, the feedback from peers via classroom inter-visitations, and supervisor’s observations. In-school professional development is provided daily during our inquiry team meetings via the "Do It Yourself" [DIY] portion of the meeting, in which administration works collaboratively with staff to facilitate discussions aimed at improving teacher practice to more effectively meet the needs of every students. Out of school professional development is provided to staff based on the needs as well. In collaboration with Therapeutic Crisis Intervention System [TCIS], strategies, there is a strong focus on use of Social and Emotional Learning [SEL] enables staff to self-reflect to ensure they are best meeting the needs of all students. With our expansion to MSCD Preparatory, school leadership will focus on growing best practices to effectively meet the needs of standardized and alternately assessed students. We have conducted research and met with several District 75 partner schools regarding scheduling, curriculum, and staffing to best prepare for the upcoming school year. Our focus will continue to target professional development, teacher collaboration, and ongoing review of student work [ATLAS Protocol]. At MSCD Career AcademyMTC, we will continue to prepare students successfully for college and career readiness. Students at MSCD Career AcademyMTC will have the option to transition to our inclusion programs or the CBVI Manhattan Transition Center. All teachers will focus on advancing students to the next level by providing academic rigor and maintaining aligning to age appropriate curriculum at a grade appropriate level. The school handbook outlines clear expectations regarding academic instruction. Monthly teacher and paraprofessional meetings provide professional development in curriculum implementation. During the monthly meetings, the entire faculty collaborate and share best practices. This is further reinforced by the Japanese Lesson Study model, in which teachers are provided time to meet, review the curriculum, and plan 2018-19 CEP 12  instructional content. It is again reinforced by residencies and shadowing, in which we build capacity by providing students the opportunities to co-teach and shadow each other to learn best practices. This approach establishes different ways of accessing staff expertise and work by promoting activities such as peer coaching, mentoring, collegial inquiry, and feedback that is embedded as part of practice. Staff is held accountable for their experiences as they are expected to turn key new strategies and skills the following day during our inquiry process. Throughout the school year, teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors and school staff take turns presenting a 1-hour PD to the entire staff. Topics vary depending on the interests, preferences and needs of the school community. These teacher-driven inquiry cycles maximize time spend collaborating as they are focused and outlined in alignment with the curriculum. Each week, teachers are provided time to meet in their instructional team to review lessons, share best practices, discuss student progress, and plan for upcoming lessons. Business partners such as AHRC, Mt. Sinai Hospital, the Grand Hyatt Hotel, Teacher College, Barnard College, NYU, and Bellevue Hospital, GMHC, St. Marks, Best Buddies after-school program and Department of Education provide students with career opportunities and access to employment with livable wage. Our three inclusion programs: Harvey Milk High School, High School of Fashion Industries, and Hudson High of Learning Technologies. School provide students with access to the General Education curriculum and achievement of the high school diploma. At our main campus, we have collaborated with IncludeNYC to provide our students with skills and techniques for self-advocating during the IEP process. Additionally, our Co-op Tech partnership affords our students intensive CTE training and NYS vocational certificates. Collaborative Teachers Teacher/Related Services teams examine the curriculum and alongside of instructional shifts. To support high level of student thinking and participation, teachers identified instructional shifts that are embedded into their lessons. These shifts include: 4, 5, 6 in ELA and 5 in Math. Teachers collaborate on their lessons to align with instruction shifts. This is accomplished with the use of inter-visitations, Japanese Lesson Study, and residency which create opportunities for cross content instructions. Japanese Lesson Study sessions are scheduled each week; teachers conduct inter-classroom visitations and are then given time to reflect on the instruction to identify areas of strengths and improvement. The teacher teams meet to analyze formative assessments that are used to assess student progress in understanding the concepts in class daily. Teachers review the assessments to create multiple entry points, supports and extensions. Our instructional focus for next year 751M’s instructional focus for 2018-19 is: 751M’s instructional focus for 2018-19 is continuous assessment and data analysis informed by the ATLAS Protocol and Richard Elmore’s Cycle of Learning, solely committed to strengthening student voice and increasing movement along the educational continuum. During each morning’s inquiry team meeting, teachers conduct review of student’s work using the ATLAS Protocol. This allows them to measure the Present Level of Performance and identify next steps to ensure that students are provided with a rigorous and ambitious education. In 2018-19, our inquiry team meetings will be structured to provide more opportunities to expand ATLAS protocol for directly measuring the impact of strategies and best practices. This will be done by ongoing review of the impact of teacher practice on student performance in everyday lesson. The ATLAS Protocol provides time and the expectation for students and staff to participate in multiple cycles 2018-19 CEP 13  of field testing, feedback and revision of the instructional program to monitor and evaluate its impact and make necessary refinements to support continuous improvement. The inquiry team meetings provide a structured opportunity for cross role groups to design and implement innovative approaches to improving learning, work and practice. It is the beginning phases of engaging all stakeholders in developing and sustaining a learning environment that actively involves students in meaningful, relevant learning that is clearly connected to their experiences, culture and futures, and require them to construct meaning of concepts or processes in deductive or inductive ways. The inquiry process engages varied perspectives, which assists in determining how to best integrate the use of the most effective and appropriate technologies into teaching, learning and the daily workings of the school organization. Team meetings are conducted each week to review student work in relations to the school curricula. Revisions are made to the curricula based on students understanding of the concepts related to the text as demonstrated through student work products. One of the revisions is identifying vocabulary words that students study both within their text and within the events in the society today. This helps students become more engaged with materials stems from times that are unfamiliar to them and it helps them to make connections between ideas and cultures. Teacher teams submit weekly team reports that summarize their accomplishments for the previous week, while outline their goals for the week ahead. These meeting minutes are shared among teams to create a contentious cycle of information, while strongly adhering to the School of One model. Rigorous Instruction At teacher meetings, both Inquiry and in-house professional development, staff determine the level of the curriculum. The curriculum advances the social-emotional growth of all our students. The commonality of instructional language are key elements in achieving these goals. School-wide instruction in all classrooms: academic, Career and Technology Education [CTE], and community based vocational internships [CBVI] offsites is rooted in the curriculum map which provides a monthly ELA text accompanied by selected articles from the HMH Core Collections and iReady curriculum. All reading material, assessments, and homework are fully differentiated at ability levels. All instructional lessons contain a fully integrated writing and independent reading component. Curricula design incorporate the use the central text so that students would be given opportunities for multiple access points. It also gives students the opportunity to explore deeper understanding of text. Students are assessed via Scantron Performance Series and teacher made assessments and rubrics. There is a focus in the school on using evidence from the text to support their opinions during discussion and writing activities. Teacher teams conduct review of student work and assessments to ensure connection to Common Core Learning Standards and CDOS. The Inquiry team [all staff] review student performance tasks and curricula to certify a strong connection to the Advance, CCLS, CDOS, FCSS and SEDL, CIE. We pay attention to providing a continuum of services – from main campus to CBVI offsites -for our students, as we vigorously promote their rights to full participation in the workplace. We are fully committed to the implementation of the Chancellor’s Capacity framework for Great Schools, the Common Core Learning Standards [CCLS], Career Development Occupational Studies [CDOS], Family and Consumer Science Standards [FCSS], Social/Emotional and Development and Learning [SEDL] at all stages of students’ education at 751M. 2018-19 CEP 14  Allowing us to maintain the strong content connection from classroom-to-classroom, is the implementation of EyeOnData online digital data collection platform. EyeOnData is a real-time digital data collection and communication platform—essentially an instant data input and immediate data analysis system which ultimately enables us to impact the academic, social and emotional development of students. EyeOnData was designed to preserve rigor and to maintain high expectations for all students. The system is used for tracking, monitoring, and analyzing student’s performance instantly, which improves transparency, providing teachers access to students’ performance as they transition from classroom-to-classroom. EyeOnData drives educators to be persistent in improving student achievement. It allows educators to improve student performance by highlighting areas of weaknesses and focus. EyeOnData provides valuable information for teachers about students’ performance before they even arrive in class. This immediate access to data allows for interventions and modifications that are essential to capture and maintain students’ interests. EyeOnData provides teachers with data regarding student's performance, enabling teachers to modify instructions to meet the needs of students. For example, if students can master level 2 DOK questions in ELA during their first period class, by the time they arrive in Math, second period, their math teacher will be able to adjust instructions to ensure they are provided the opportunity to answer level 3 DOK questions. As part of our curriculum, we have a robust Arts program that includes residencies and collaborations from outside agencies. Some of these include Best Buddies, Alvin Ailey, Shakespeare in Special Education Classrooms and Zumba. In addition, we have partnered with the Bowery Mission, where our students are involved with purchasing and delivering food to different homeless shelters in the Lower East Side. We have also participated in the District 75 Festival of the Arts, Social Studies Fair, STEM Fair, Lego Expo, and Social Justice Expo, and the NYPD Team UP event. Our collaboration with Alvin Ailey has allows us various opportunities to expand our Positive Behavior Intervention Support [PBIS] program. We have found that student’s misbehavior decreased before, during and after dance class, while their attendance and participation increased tremendously. After surveying students, we have found that the Alvin Ailey residency is a dynamic and interactive way for students to express themselves through dance. What’s more impressive is the use of our curriculum in the culminating project that was performed by students. We have also started the implementation of Restorative Justice and peer mediation as part of our PBIS Program. In addition to student council, Restorative Justice practices is a different way to promoting positive school culture. Through adherence to the Capacity Framework’s focus on instructional excellence, rigorous academics are a hallmark both at our 4th Street main campus and at every one of our seventeen vocational internships off sites. A pivotal factor in successful education of the “whole-child” is providing school-wide instruction in SEDL. SEDL impacts student growth and progress both in the academic and the vocational arenas. Furthermore, the influence of SEDL extends to the school community as well as students interact with peers, teachers, parents, and CBOs. In order to effectively infuse SEDL into the school curriculum, all stakeholders are part of the development and implementation process. Students are provided a scaffolded curriculum, which is directly aligned to SEDL New York State standards. All staff is provided access to frequent professional development such as Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services [TCIS] and the Registered Behavior Technician [RBT] training to effectively implement positive behavioral supports in constructive ways. 2018-19 CEP 15  This deliberate combination of Common Core Learning Standards [CCLS], Career Development Occupational Studies [CDOS], Family and Consumer Science Standards, and Social/Emotional Development and Learning [SEDL] leads to significantly improved student outcomes in the future. In our classrooms, SEL is of great significance and has a tangible, direct effect on our students’ lives. Students master academic, vocational, and social-emotional skills to compete and be successful in this global economy. Strong Family-Community Ties The school leaders publish weekly newsletter called the Bridge that communicates instructional expectations. The Bridge is the product of close collaboration between administration and staff with 90% of the content being written by school staff and students. The Bridge is used to inform the school community. It is the result of a collaborative effort from both faculty and student. The Bridge addresses various areas such as professional development, parental workshops, and show cases data that is used to make informed decisions about students’ progress. The school leaders send monthly postcards to parents informing them about the monthly curricula themes and texts that will be covered during the months. This message is also echoed by School Messenger. The monthly Coffee with the Principal meetings provides a platform for instructional discussions. During student council monthly meeting the school leaders discuss the instructional expectations with students. Educators maintain communication with parents via daily homework blog, which provides instructional supports. The Parent Coordinator holds bi-monthly meetings with families to discuss transition planning. Transition Assistant provides individual one to one family transition consultation. Alumni Roots association provides career and transition supports to our graduates. Additionally, programs like Best Buddies allow us to expand our partnership with Bard High School, allowing us to provide our students with access to general education and college readiness. Parents are informed and trained on the SEDL curriculum to reinforce its lessons at home. Parents are also provided quarterly newsletters and monthly curriculum post cards and daily access to homework via home blogs. In class, Academic Intervention Services are provided to students, including iXL, HMH Collections and iReady. We also provide after school programs and homework support to better support students academically. Current research indicates that fundamental personality factors - conscientiousness, openness, agreeableness, emotional stability, and extraversion - have the largest manageable influence on academic success [Poropat, 2014]. The executive cabinet and Parent Coordinator reviews the goals and outcomes for parent involvement. The School Leadership Team monitors our CEP goals and provide a review to ensure that we are on track to achieving each goal. We have an ongoing relationship with the NYPD 9th Precinct, with regularly scheduled collaborative events. Supportive Environment It is this consistent focus on study, social /emotional skills, real life vocational training and fundamental hard work that sets our school apart. Proof of this is the fact that 100% of our graduates are placed directly into either competitive employment, supportive and/or agency linkages. In alignment with this vision, we have three full inclusive classes at the CTE High School of Fashion Industries, Harvey Milk High School, and Hudson High School for Learning Technologies and at Co-op Tech, as well as strong partnerships with A.H.R.C. and with Lighthouse International. Our school exists not in isolation but as part of a vibrant community of cooperative educational institutions, as exemplified by our relationships with Best Buddies program. Best Buddies program provides our students with direct employment placement. We engage in collaboration with students, parents/guardians, teaching faculty, paraprofessionals, related services providers, support staff, District 75 and our valued community partners. We established focus groups to address Chancellor Farina’s Pillars and Capacity Framework. Each team examined the data and its impact for CEP goals and provided detailed feedback. 2018-19 CEP 16  Trust 751M demonstrate trust with our strong connections between our main campus and community based vocational internships worksites, and 3 inclusive programs. We are committed to involving parents and families every step of the academic and vocational journey. The administration’s openness and willingness to improve, and their commitment to trust and respect serves as an example for staff, students and families to share and learn from each other. The commitment of staff to improve the culture, climate, and interpersonal relationships is evidenced, not only within the school community but also extending beyond to our CBVI sites. Our partnership with NYPD has expanded to include participation in community meetings and NYPD Explores program. We are now a Community partner, part of the new NYPD initiative, Neighborhood Policing plan. As part of the plan, we meet with the new recruits to discuss school system and special education. 2018-19 CEP 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75M751 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 170 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 89.4% % Reduced Lunch 27.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 53.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 72.7% 0.0% 99.4% 36.5% 2.9% 1.2% 2 29% 5.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our school’s core missions is to provide our students with rigorous instruction that incorporates both CCLS and CDOS with a school-wide and collaborative-based curriculum map. Even though our students demonstrated proficiency on state exams, after reviewing data from the 2017-2018 academic year with all stakeholders, it was determined that peer-to-peer [evidence-based] discussions can be further improved to reach even higher levels of academic achievements and successes. There is also a greater focus on reading comprehension, which impedes students learning and comprehension. Additional data source comes from the level of completion of school-based curriculum, specifically school-based units of study as outlined in our school-wide curriculum map. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in students’ reading comprehension as a result of ongoing review of performance tasks and data assessments informed by ATLAS Protocol and Richard Elmore’s Cycle of Learning as evidenced by a 5 percentage point increase in performance on Scantron Performance Series and teacher-made performance tasks. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide staff with professional development on peer-to-peer [evidence-based] discussions and strategies for facilitating discussions among students to ensure they are engaged in conversations aligned to lesson objectives. Provide teacher-driven professional development for staff on the use of data from classroom assessment and instruction to facilitate peer discussions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff 9.18-6.19 Administration All staff 9.18-6.19 Administration Daily review of student performance data by school-based Inquiry teams and teacher teams to ensure high academic rigor is provided for all students with strict alignment to Common Core Learning Standards (eighth grade level) Inquiry and Teacher Teams Weekly, 9.18-6.19 Data Specialist Teacher teams will engage in ongoing teacher-driven collegial sharing of best practices related to questioning and peer discussions. Closely monitoring and tracking students’ performance to identify supports needed by individual students. All staff All teachers Daily, Administration 9.18-6.19 Daily, 9.18-6.19 Data Specialist Support staff in designing and implementing lessons that will include cue cards for students to assist them in framing discussion questions during group work and independent practice. Support the collaboration of the bilingual and content area teachers to ensure that the level of discussions are appropriate and take into account the needs of ESL/ENL learners. Using school wide data collection system to closely track student's performance and growth, specifically as they relate to peer to peer discussions. All teachers Daily 9.18-Data Specialist 6.19 All teachers 9.18-6.19 Administration All teachers 9.18-6.19 Teachers Promote parent and family involvement by providing monthly postcards of a description of the texts and suggested strategies for improving student confidence and engaging them in discussions. Parents 9.18-6.19 Paraprofessionals Data Specialist Administration & Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 20 Engaging parents in monthly meetings focused on strategies that they can employ to gain greater confidence in students to engage them to discussions among peers. Parents 9.18-6.19 Administration & Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Topics at parent meetings and conferences will be aligned to strategies for improving peer to peer discussions. Meetings will be facilitated by members of teacher teams, the Parent Coordinator, guidance counselors and classroom paraprofessionals, who get daily interaction with students in the classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources- School Administrators, Data Specialist, Teacher Team Leaders Teachers, Support Staff Instructional resources – Student Datafolios, Teacher Produced Student Worksheets (CCLS Extensions and  AGLIs), lesson plans, Google docs, and Scantron Schedule Adjustments – Data Specialist, inquiry team meetings and teacher team meetings.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in students’ reading comprehension as a result of ongoing review of performance tasks and data assessments informed by ATLAS Protocol and Richard Elmore’s Cycle of Learning as evidenced by a 3 percentage point increase in performance on Scantron Performance Series and teacher-made performance tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School designed digital data collection platform that is aligned to the Danielson Framework, specifically targeting peer to peer discussions questioning techniques and skills. Observation data will be reviewed in comparison to data from previous years; observations will focus on peer-to-peer discussions to highlight areas of growth and needed improvement. Teacher surveys will be conducted to gauge the impact of peer to peer discussions on student learning and progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Over the course of the past several years, chronic absenteeism which is defined as two or more absences per week. While research shows “Teacher effectiveness is the strongest school-related determinant of student success ...chronic student absence reduces even the best teacher's ability to grow and move students.” When average attendance falls below 60%, students not only struggle academically, widening the achievement gap; they begin to foster attitudes that place them at risk as they ascend to the next grade level. According to the School Quality Snapshot, during the 2016-17 academic year, 751M average attendance rate fell 7%. Currently, 751M year to date attendance average is slightly above 71% indicating the need for a coordinated series of initiatives to reverse the school’s downward attendance trend. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school incentives, after school programs, school events and programs that engage student and parents, there will be an increase in student attendance by 3% over the 201-2018 attendance rates, as measured by ATS student attendance reports. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be provided to all staff on the impact of the effective implementation of the Emotional Intelligence assessment. School staff September 2018 Staff and School Leaders Staff will conduct EQ assessment to enable them to self-reflect on Social Emotional Learning and strategies for improving student participation and access to education. Staff Inquiry team meetings will include a review of promising practices and application of EQ assessments to reinforce strategies, while measuring the impact of the interventions. Teachers, RS providers, paraprofessionals Providing opportunities such as recognition events and monthly student assemblies celebrating student achievement. Staff Review school data and speak with school staff to determine the impact of EQ on student behavior. Staff September 2018 Staff and School Leaders Teacher teams Staff and School Leaders Staff and School Leaders Ongoing - On A Daily Basis - 2018-2019 Monthly from 9.16-6.18 Monthly from 9/2018-6/2019 Host a recognition day each month to celebrate students growth and progress and encourage other students to continue making efforts to improve. Administration End of each month Staff and School Leaders Inform parents of student's progress and send home copies of student's certifications for recognition for their efforts. Parent Coordinator 9/2018-6/2019 Staff and School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent meetings will focus on ways to improve student behavior. Intervention strategies will be discussed, as well as progress reviews, in which parents will be provided with weekly updates on their child's progress. This will be done by weekly phone conferences, weekly school newsletters and monthly parent newsletters. Students will be provided a reward system for reinforcing their work throughout the course of the year. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources- Administrator, Teachers, Paraprofessionals  Instructional resources – Computers, laptops and connection to the Internet.  Schedule Adjustments – Coverage for paraprofessionals during the administration of ABA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in student attendance by 1% as compared to 2017-18, measured by student attendance data and reinforced by the incentives, after school programs, school events and programs and school trips to align engage students and parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measured by a school attendance report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our school’s core missions is to provide our students with rigorous instruction that incorporates both CCLS and CDOS with a school-wide and collaborative-based curriculum map. Even though our students demonstrated proficiency on state exams, after reviewing data from the 2017-2018 academic year with all stakeholders, it was determined that the complexity of questions and scaffolding of Depth of Knowledge questions can be further improved to reach even higher levels of academic achievements and successes. As a result, during the 2018-19 school year, the focus of the Japanese lesson Study will be on analyzing and refining the complexity of questions in a lesson. Additional data source comes from the level of completion of school-based curriculum, specifically school based units of study as outlined in our school-wide curriculum map. In-school professional development is facilitated daily during our inquiry team meetings via the "Do It Yourself" [DIY] portion of the meeting, in which administration works collaboratively with staff to facilitate discussions aimed at improving teacher practice to more effectively meet the needs of every students. During the 2018-19 school year, DIY presentations will be teacher driven, allowing for peer collaboration and the expansion of the roles of teacher teams and team leaders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will facilitate regular DIY inquiry team meetings focused on the use of assessment and accountability systems that enable students, teacher, and parents to monitor student progress, teacher learning, and uncover patterns and trends to provide ways to contextualize student achievement as evidenced by meeting minutes, signing sheets, observations, and an increase in student performance. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development on the Japanese Lesson Study model. Faculty Professional development on DOK questioning and scaffolding questions [levels of complexity] so that students are able to answer questions at higher levels of the DOK Faculty Schedule inquiry team meetings that use the Japanese Lesson Study protocol Faculty Review observation reports to determine the levels of questioning and student responses Continue the use of school-wide data collection system to track questions answered by students Schedule classroom inter-visitations to provide teachers the opportunity to review lessons and how they are implemented in other classrooms. Faculty Faculty Faculty Staff will complete written reflections on the inter-visitations and engage in discussions and use their finding to support the refinement of lessons using the Japanese Lesson Study model Faculty Teachers will conduct review of student work via the ATLAS protocol to track the progress of the goal, and make modification instruction and assessments based on the results of the review. Faculty Weekly from September 18 - June 19 Daily Inquiry Team Meetings [25 minutes] 9.18 - 9.19 Daily; 9/2018 - June 2019 Observation cycles; 9.18- 6-19 Weekly; 9.18- 6-19 Weekly for 45 minute periods; 9.18- 6-19 Daily; 9.18- 6-19 Daily; 9.18- 6-19 Administration Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration Teachers Teachers Administration Provide parent workshops on questioning and discussion strategies and the different levels of questions that help promote their child's engagement in discussions in the home Parents 9.18- 6-19 Provide parents with questions to ask about the monthly texts that students are reading Parents 9.18- 6-19 Parent Coordinator and Teachers Parent Coordinator and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will facilitate meetings and conferences with parents to advise them of student growth, using data driven responses to demonstrate how the Japanese Lesson Study has impacted students' performance and responses to questions along the continuum of the DOK. Families will be engaged in curriculum planning and design, to ensure parent voice is prevalent in the level of work their child receives. Monthly reports will be mailed to parents informing them of their child's progress. Phone conferences, emails and School Messengers are some of the means by which parents will receive timely updates. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources- Administrator, Data Specialist, Teachers  Instructional resources – Atlas Protocol, Student-Based Datafolios, NYCDOE Professional Development Website, Google docs, curriculum map, 751M weekly  Schedule Adjustments – Coverage for faculty and staff during the Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will facilitate regular DIY inquiry team meetings focused on the use of assessment and accountability systems that enable students, teacher, and parents to monitor student progress, teacher learning, and uncover patterns and trends to provide ways to contextualize student achievement as evidenced by meeting minutes, signing sheets, observations, and an increase in student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation data summary and teacher evaluation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 751M is committed to supporting students in their LRE. Currently, the school has 3 inclusion classes, one class at each of the following schools: the High School of Fashion Industries, Harvey Milk High School and Hudson High School, respectively. There have been 4 cases in which students were referred to the inclusion program, but were unable to successfully acclimate to their new environment. To ensure that our students have optimal experiences in transitioning to inclusion classes, the school needs to provide students with a range of skills that will support their success in inclusion. Paraprofessionals have stated, during focus groups, that they want more professional development on ways of adapting the content materials to meet the needs of students. They want to increase their understanding of how to use the IEP to help them be prepared for their classes and to have accessible content material. There have been questions regarding the screen criteria for inclusion and requirements for inclusion. Additionally, there have been a need for more rigorous workshops and preparation for students transitioning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10 percentage point increase in opportunities for parents to volunteer time to support the school community and participate in in-school activities via opportunities for joint-planning of instructional objectives and goals, school trips and events, and parent and student workshops that address instruction and behavioral need of students as compared to 2017-18 as evidenced by parent logs and signing sheets. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct joint intervisitations with teams of teachers, Related Services providers to increase awareness of the programs. Staff 9.18-6.19 Administration Conduct student tours of the inclusion programs Monitor students' progress towards meeting school criteria for referral to inclusion Students Students 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Teacher Engage in ongoing exchange of information about the demands of the inclusion programs at the community schools to ensure teachers and Related Service providers prepare students accordingly. Faculty and Students 9.18-6.19 Administration Conduct inquiry team meetings to discuss students who are potential candidates for inclusion Faculty and Students Collaborate with community schools to develop a menu of orientation opportunities for students to become acclimated to community schools Faculty and Students 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration Parents 9.18-6.19 Administration Paraprofessionals 9.18-6.19 Administration Staff 9.18-6.19 Inquiry team Teachers 9.18-6.19 Administration Teachers 9.18-6.19 Administration Conduct meetings with parents to inform the about the inclusion programs Provide professional development for support staff on adapting the general education curriculum for students be able to access the curriculum Conduct ongoing review of student progress to identify potential students for LRE placements. Teachers design a series of activities for the workshop sessions that help students transition to inclusive education Conduct a two-week workshop session for students on study skills, organization techniques, use of resources and self advocacy to support students in transition to inclusion programs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will play active roles on the IEP team in determining the placement their child receives. Parents will be incited to workshops that specifically explains the benfits of LRE movements. Teacher teams will review with parents the options that their child has moving along LRE, to ensure that parents make the best choice for their child. Parents will be advised at the time their child is ready for LRE placement. Teacher teams will review student progress data and continuously provide update to parents too ensure they are well-informed. School teams will increase opportunities for parents to volunteer time to support the school community and participate in in-school activities via opportunities for joint-planning of instructional objectives and goals, school trips and events, and parent and student workshops that address instruction and behavioral need of students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources-Administration, Teachers, Transition Coordinator, School-Based Support Staff, Students,   Best Buddies and Managers Instructional Resources- SESIS, EyeOnData, STARS Classroom, Scantron Performance Series Schedule Adjustments - Extended inquiry team and teacher team meetings, extended time during the Pupil Personnel Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5 percentage point increase in opportunities for parents to volunteer time to support the school community and participate in in-school activities via opportunities for joint-planning of instructional objectives and goals, school trips and events, and parent and student workshops that address instruction and behavioral need of students as compared to 2017-18 as evidenced by parent logs and signing sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. There will be an increase in student enrollment and referrals to LRE. LRE is measured by multiple means including placement from 6:1:1 to 8:1:1 to 12:1:1; inclusion; reduction in Related Services hours; travel training; removal of 1:1 paraprofessionals, etc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 751M is committed to ensuring that parents are active partners in the education of their children. In order to support parents, 751M is committed to providing parents and families with timely information and materials to increase parental engagement and involvement by sending home weekly curriculum post cards, monthly parent coordinator's newsletter, daily interactive homework blogs and weekly phone calls and/or letters mailed home to inform parents of student's performance and progress in school. During the 2016-2017 school year, there was a core group of approximately 15 parents who attended workshops and school events regularly. Another 10 parents participated in various workshops and school events occasionally. 751M shares a strong commitment to increasing the number of parents who attend and participate in school events regularly. There continues to be an increase in the number of parent who participate in IEP conferences and transition planning. The Learning Environment Survey in the area of family and community ties showed a 40% parent participation rate. Most of the parent responses were positive, (90-95%), however there is a need to hear the voices of all parents by increasing the participation rate. The positive response was significantly lower where only 75% of parents stated they had been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support this school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events. Additionally, 44% of parents expressed the need for stronger enrichment programs including after-school programs, clubs and teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement a series of professional learning communities and targeted DIY professional development in questioning and discussion techniques and student engagement, as evidenced by a 10% performance increase in Danielson component 3b and 3c. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Planning and provide professional development and training opportunities on a monthly basis. Family Partners Disseminating information about workshops to parents and families sponsoring by District 75 in other Manhattan schools. Family Partners To support the needs of bilingual and ENL students, school provides parents with access to online programs designed to improve student achievement. Family Partners Continue providing access to daily homework blogs to increase opportunities for parents to support students from home. Family Partners Provide monthly newsletter and Monthly Coffee with the Principal. Expand involvement of parents in school policies and decision making by including parents in different committees, including the teacher hiring committee. Family Partners Family Partners 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration 9.18-6.19 Parent Coordinator 9.18-6.19 Administration Continue to invite parents to open-house and curriculum development day Survey parents about ways that they can volunteer in the school community. Collaborate with the parent coordinator to review surveys and match parents to appropriate volunteer activities Sponsor two school culminating projects that showcase evidence of curriculum instruction as key parent involvement activates Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration Parent 9.18-6.19 Administration Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration Administration 9.18-6.19 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Zumba, St. Marks Church, Advocates for Children, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 32   Human Resources-Administration, Teachers, School-Based Support Staff, Students, Transition Coordinator, Parent Coordinator Parents, OPWDD representatives  Instructional Resources-Teacher Created Homework Blogs, School-Based Parent Newsletter, OPWDD Website and Paper-Based Information, Google Docs, and 751M Weekly  Schedule Adjustments-Teacher coverage in order to meet with parents when needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will implement a series of professional learning communities and targeted DIY professional development in questioning and discussion techniques and student engagement, as evidenced by a 5% performance increase in Danielson component 3b and 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Records of parents attendance from conferences, and other school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of student’s ELA IEP goals and progress notes Mathematics Review of student’s Mathematics IEP goals and progress notes Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Online self-directed learning Pull–out one-to-one instruction provided students who need intensive interventions. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During daily scheduled times and at home Delivered daily during scheduled time. Small group instruction Delivered daily during math courses. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The Wilson Reading System addresses reading comprehension, vocabulary and fluency. Small group Instruction is designed to address learning strategies for ELL students. The program develops basic literacy skills through a phonics-based approach. It is delivered during the school day, individually and in small group settings. We will utilizeiXLto target and appropriately meet the needs of students in grades 9-12.iXLwill be used to improve ELA skills Monthly instructional thematic units of study based upon the school-wide curriculum map and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and EngageNY. 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Review of student’s academic IEP goals and progress notes Social Studies Review of student’s academic IEP goals and progress notes Mathematics lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate diversity of learners. We will utilize iXL to target and appropriately meet the needs of students in grades 9-12. iXL will be used to improve math skills relating to operations, problem solving and factoring and relation and functions, which are key elements for acclimating students in inclusion. Monthly instructional thematic units based on school-wide curriculum map and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and EngageNY. Science/STEM lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate diversity of learners. Monthly instructional thematic units of study based on school-wide curriculum map and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and EngageNY. Social Studies (Global History & U.S. History) lesson plans define three levels of Small group instruction Delivered daily during Science/STEM courses Small group setting Delivered once a week during the regular school day 2018-19 CEP 35  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Review of student’s counseling IEP goals and progress notes differentiated tasks to accommodate diversity of learners Women’s and Men’s groups meet weekly to discuss topics related to academic growth, attendance, punctuality, responsibility, self-determination, self-advocacy, life skills, positive self-esteem and relationships . Respect for All anti- bullying Course/CORE Counseling Sessions Small group setting Large group setting Individual and Group setting Delivered once a week during the regular school day. Delivered once a week during the regular school day. Delivered weekly during the scheduled day. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 $12, 336 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan School for Career Development, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Manhattan School for Career Development will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 44  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Manhattan School for Career Development, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Ensure that all students meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 46  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Commencing with the 2018/19 School year, 751M’s Title III program will be taking place in two separate locations: 113 East 4th St, NY NY 10003 [MSCD Academy] and 75 Morton Street, NY NY [MSCD Preparatory]. 751M is a vocational high school in District 75 whose mission is “to promote a challenging educational and community-based work experience, with equity of access that will enable all students to transition become integrated, productive members of a multicultural society.” Research shows that ELLs acquire basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) in 1-2 years but take 5-7 years to develop cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP); with direct teaching of the language in the academic context (Cummins 1979, 1981). This process takes longer for some of our ELLs due to their cognitive levels, which range from LD (Learning Disabled) to ID (Intellectually Disabled). Most of our students are at the conversational English stage. We will address this gap through our Title III program called Music is My Language. Music can be used in the adult English-as-a-Second-Language (ESL) classroom to create a learning environment; to build listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills; to increase vocabulary; and to expand cultural knowledge (Lems, 2001). Neurologists have found that musical and language processing occur in the same area of the brain, and there appear to be parallels in how musical and linguistic syntax are processed (Maess & Koelsch, 2001). Music and language are generated from a finite set of sounds (notes or phonemes), carved out of a larger possible set of sounds. As a person experiences these sounds, they organize them into distinct categories, which develop into languages. According to Stephen Krashen, meaningful usage of the new language and natural communication helps people to acquire a language (Krashen, 1987). Through the Music is My Language program, we aim to give students the opportunity to experience the English language in an appealing and communicative fashion. The areas of concentration include: songwriting, music listening, lyrical studies, instrument learning and performance (electronic and traditional), digital music production and music business fundamentals (e.g. copywriting, digital distribution, marketing). Students will create digital portfolios with audio/video media based on their interests and abilities (e.g. some students may elect to write songs, other may choose to create instrumental tracks). Through these activities students will develop vocabulary, decoding skills, schema, receptive and expressive language, improved eye gaze, self-confidence, computer literacy, problem solving skills and improved writing skills. To give students a broader perspective on music business fundamentals, we will collaborate with Universal Temple of the Arts for a 6-session music production residency. The students will work with professional recording artists to produce songs as well as to participate in a live performance; culminating activity. There will be 24 students served: 12 students at the MSCD Preparatory (grades 6-8) and 12 students at the MSCD Career Academy (grades 9-12). 19 Instructional sessions will be held from 3:30PM-5:30PM on Tuesdays and Thursdays from January 2019- April 2019. Tuesday sessions will take place at the MSCD Preparatory 75 Morton 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Street (2nd Floor, room TBD). Thursday sessions will take place at the MSCD Career Academy 113 E.4th Street. The last session will be held at 75 Morton Street. Students and parents will participate in a shared culminating activity. All instruction will be in English using various ENL methodologies including: Total Physical Response--TPR (McCloskey, 1988), The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach to the Learning Experience (Huey, 1908; Smith, 1967), Whole Language Approach (Edelsky, C. and Smith, K., 1983), Graphic Organizers, differentiated instruction, and cooperative learning. Classroom instruction is also enhanced through the use of technology. This program will be administered by 1 certified ENL teacher (TESOL), 1 Paraprofessional, and 1 Administrator. A secretary will assist for 10 hours making copies for the instructors, preparing and mailing notices to parents and sending messages to parents via School Messenger regarding the program. The materials to be used are: 1) Mac Book Pro 13 inch laptop, computers, pens, pencils and chart paper (which are already available) 2) equipment purchased from prior Title III programs, including iPads and digital cameras and 3) student mobile devices and tablets. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: As the level of rigor increases in classrooms via the Common Core Learning Standards, The Danielson Framework and other educational trends, teachers need to maintain high standards in their classroom practices to ensure student learning will be transformed (Loucks-Horsley 1998). Professional Development plays a key role in securing positive student outcomes. The teachers/staff to receive training are: 1 ENL Teacher, 1 Paraprofessional, and 1 Administrator. The PD is schedule from 3:30 PM-5:30 PM on the following dates: 01.02.19, 01.09.19, 02.06.19, 03.06.19 and 04.03.19. All sessions add up to 10 hours of Professional Development. The topics covered include: 1. Second Language Acquisition and Assessment. 2. ENL Learning Styles and Teaching Methodologies. 3. Developing Effective Assessments for ELLsed. 4. Using Technology to Teach ELLs. 5. Integrating English Language Arts Across the Content Areas in the ENL Classroom. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parents are the primary stakeholders in the success of their children at school and beyond. At the special education level, they play a major role in the development and implementation of the IEP. Student learning outcomes are directly affected by parent and teacher interactions. Ideally, teachers should communicate with families and respond to them frequently, in culturally sensitive manner, with students contributing to the communication (Danielson, 2007). Parents will participate in all Title III sessions with their youngsters to reinforce the learning as well hone their English Language Skills, when applicable. The parents will work together as team members to support their youngsters by participating in music production activities, helping to develop student digital portfolios and by creating their own musical pieces. The ENL Teacher and the Paraprofessional will facilitate the 24 instructional sessions for students and their parents. Parents will be notified when visiting the building (PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences, IEP meetings), by correspondence (in English and in their Native Languages), through an event Calendar sent out by the Parent Coordinator distributed by mail, student’s backpacks or e-mail. Parents also have the option to access our parent website and see a list of upcoming activities. Please note that appropriate translation and interpretation services are provided to meet our community needs. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services $2,400 2018-19 CEP 52 Budgeted Amount $7,996.84 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Instructional Sessions 1 Administrator: 19 Sessions X 2 HRS X $63.45 = $2,411.10 1 Teacher: 19 Sessions X 2HRS X $60.65 =$2,304.70 1 Paraprofessional: 19 Sessions X 2hrs X $34.73 = $1,319.74 Professional Development Component (3:30-5:30): 1 Administrator 5 sessions X 2 HRS X $63.45 = $634.50 1 Teacher: 5 sessions X 2 HRS x $60.65 = $606.50 1 Paraprofessional 5 sessions X 2 HRS x $34.73 = $347.30 1 Secretary: 5 sessions x 2 HRS X $37.30 = $373.00 Universal Temple of the Arts  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Music Production Residency (6 Sessions: Dates TBD ) Assessment and ESL Alternative Approach https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1553790936/ref=as_at?creativeASIN= 1553790936&linkCode=w61&imprToken=BdxtxYjSlfzhIJQRIvszEQ&slotNum= 4&tag=fluentu-20 3 books for ENL Teacher, Paraprofessional and Administrator $34.00 x 3 =$102 Language is Music https://www.amazon.com/Language-Music-Learn-Foreign-Languages/dp/0982018991 3 books for ENL Teacher, Paraprofessional and Administrator $15 x 3= $45.00 Mac Book Pro 13 inch laptop: https://www.apple.com/us-hed/shop/bag $1,648.99 n/a n/a Refreshments for parents and culminating activity n/a  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1,795.99 n/a n/a $173.17 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Manhattan School for Career Development Borough Manhattan School Number 751 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ewa Asterita Coach Raul Padilla ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vacancy Teacher/Subject Area Melody Tuck/Math Teacher/Subject Area Yvonne Cortes Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Thomas Rosa/Dean Assistant Principal Yakeen Dinmahammad Coach type here School Counselor Jeanette Montolio Parent Kaitlyn Stillwagon/Art Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member Ketler Louissaint Other (Name and Title) 2 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 206 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 53 Total number of ELLs Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): 25.73% ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.48% K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) PrograLangm TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL . K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 751 At P751M, we administer a Scantron Performance Series assessment during the fall and spring semesters to gauge the literacy skills of our student population, including our ELLs. Other assessments for 751M ELLs include the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) and the NYSESLAT. Teachers conduct ongoing assessments with the assistance of Spanish-speaking paraprofessionals. Students are assessed on benchmark achievements, based on their IEP mandates. We also utilize 2018-19 CEP 55  teacher designed materials and vocational assessments. Data gathered from the aforementioned assessments inform the next-step design process and IEP goal/objective creation and implementation. Data is collected to track student progress. Progress reports accompany quarterly report cards. Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 751 751 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We assess our students using Scantron in September, February, and June. We also use NYSESLAT and NYSAA, while our standardized inclusion students are assessed through the NYS Regents Examination. These tools measure baseline, progress and identify areas of need. We hold daily Inquiry meetings where student data is analyzed through our in house data collection system (Eyeondata) and we also use the ATLAS Protocol to zone in on individual student work. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We assess our students using Scantron in September, February, and June. We also use NYSESLAT and NYSAA, while our standardized inclusion students are assessed through the NYS Regents Examination. These tools measure baseline, progress and identify areas of need. We hold daily Inquiry meetings where student data is analyzed through our in house data collection system (Eyeondata) and we also use the ATLAS Protocol to zone in on individual student work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our program will be considered successful if we can demonstrate an increase in student movement from Entering to Commanding (or beyond) on the speaking and listening modalities of the state exam, and from Entering to Expanding (or beyond) on the reading and writing portions. Currently, we assess our students using Scantron, NYSESLAT, NYSAA, while our standardized inclusion students are assessed through the NYS Regents. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We hold daily Inquiry meetings where student data is analyzed through our in- house data collection system (EyeOnData). Teachers regularly analyze student progress and discuss areas of need and growth during daily inquiry meetings and Instructional focus teams. Teachers make adjustments to weekly instruction with student needs in mind and then they discuss results the following meeting. We use the ATLAS protocol every week to address the needs of individual students that require further interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Currently, our school does not administer ELL periodic assessments. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 56  We use ATS documents, such as the RLAT, to identify our students' NYSESLAT progress and levels. The majority of students score higher on the speaking and listening portions of the exam than the reading and writing portions. According to the 2017 RLAT NYSESLAT report [which does not include the six 75 Morton students as of 7/16/18] from 2017, 6 of our ENL students are at Entering Level; 11 are Emerging; 22 Transitioning; 3 Expanding and 0 Commanding. Transitioning level is a most frequently observed designation for all grade levels. We also offer our students AIS and iXL in reading and math. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL program consists of a stand alone/integrated ENL model. Students are grouped based on IEP ratios and recommendations. Our heterogeneous, ungraded groups are taught are taught by a certified ENL teachers in stand alone ENL or integrated ENL in a core content area. All our students are receiving their requisite minutes as per CR Part 154-2. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. NA. Our TBE program has been discontinued. We do not have enough bilingual students for a TBE program. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently our school only features an ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. For the coming 2018/19 we will have 1 ENL teacher. We are currently have a vacancy for an ENL teacher, our program will meet the CR Part 154 mandates as best as we are able given our shortage of ENL teachers. Once our ENL vacancy is filled, our ENL teacher at the mainsite and at 75 Morton [our offiste Middle School], will provide all ENL students at the mainsite campus and 75 Morton with their individual mandated hours. Entering level students in ENL will be provided at least 540 instructional minutes, while Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students are receiving 360, 180 and 180 respectively. Ms. Yip, our ENL teacher at Teacher's College worksite CBVI location, will provide students attending that sitw with their minutes. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All classes follow the school-wide curriculum and read a common text each month. Vocabulary will be translated in Spanish for Spanish bilingual students. Visual images, music, dance, and video clips are used to enrich and further support instruction and content in Native Language. Translated text modifications are provided to in Native language to support is provided to support bilingual Spanish speakers. Bilingual students will be supported by language paraprofessionals. In freestanding ENL, native language support is provided by bilingual staff present in the classroom, i.e. paraprofessionals. Content area support is provided to ELLs in school-wide, curriculum-aligned instructions. ENL teachers use ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response and provide an extra acquisition support of CALP through the employment of Depth of Knowledge (DOK) stem questions. Moreover, students are encouraged to use evidence-based terms and context clues by revisiting texts as per the Next generation Standards 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 57  We currently do not have a TBE program since we do not have the numbers to support a TBE program in any one language. As of now we only have 3 Spanish: bilingual students. These students are accompanied by a language paraprofessional. Both Enl and non ENL teachers use Google Docs to translate printed work. The paraprofessionals assigned to the students review and help edit the translations. Our school orders novels in the native language when they are available and also provide staff with translated PDFs. ELLs are evaluated in their native languages in different ways. In both stand alone and integrated classrooms, teachers and related staff conduct ongoing assessments with the assistance of Spanish speaking paraprofessionals and translated documents stated above. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The teachers scaffold student learning based on the work collected. SIFE students, as well as newcomers, developing, long terms and former ELLs provided the same opportunities and access as their non ENL peers. Sife are given multiple incentives to attend school. They, along with all ELLs, are invited to participate in our Title III program. They also participate in our Career Based Vocational Instruction sites (CBVI). Our Ell students are extended the same opportunities and access to our CBVI programs as their non ENL peers. Language does not play a part in a students placement in a CBVI. All supports as mentioned above are provided as deemed necessary. Some of the other activities offered include: Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS); school trips; school store access; monthly assemblies; lunchtime; and recreational activities, e.g. music composition, dance, chess, career exploration and sports. New ELLs (0-3 years) are tested using the NYSESLAT. Once their grades are reported, the ENL team, consisting of two certified ENL teachers develop an action plan to address their needs. For example, students who score poorly on the writing portion of the exam will be given additional support at school via technology, e.g. the iPad (relevant apps include: Pearson Grammar Prep, Dragon Dictation and Flashcard Creator). Furthermore, in addition to their mandated ENL minutes, these students receive Ixl or AIS support depending on their individual needs. These students’ progress will be monitored yearly by referencing the RLAT report which provides the NYSESLAT test results for each modality: speaking, listening, reading and writing. LEPs in the 4-6 year range receive more intensive interventions. In addition to the mandated hours of English language instruction (as per CR 154) they also receive AIS through afterschool activities, e.g. homework help and the VTEA funded job club. Longterm ELLs continue to receive ESL services as they change over to the Manhattan Transition Center (751M work sites), which offers intensive vocational training and assistance with adult agency contact. Every worksite has been equipped with laptops or desktops and Internet access for students and staff. The ESL teacher continues to build the ELL's functional English language skills through push-in/pullout instruction with special emphasis on work-readiness, e.g. interviewing skills, resume writing and filling out applications.   5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status DOK questions stems, considering student levels as per IEP and ELL level. Modified readings in both English and home/native language(s). Frequent and ongoing assessments, modified homework and student collaborative activities that are sensitive to all learning styles/levels 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 751M ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize student time spent with non-disabled peers. Some of our students participate in MSCD’s standardized inclusion program at The High School for Fashion Industries, Harvey Milk and Hudson High-School. The students attend inclusion classes in a general education setting and receive Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) for extra support in reaching their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 58  751M offers Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to its students Ms. Kwan Zien, will continue to offer the service to a selected number of ELL students who require extra support in language acquisition (determined by baseline data of informal teacher class observations and NYSESLAT scores). Our language paraprofessional will continue working closely with our ENL and all other teachers to ensure that intervention programs are accessible to bilingual students. AIS is also provided for ELA, math and social studies by the teachers in the respective subject areas for targeted interventions. Our parent coordinator works closely and communicates frequently with bilingual parents. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We will be collaborating and partnering with students from the general education sites 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We did not have enough students to justify a TBE program. We had a total of 2 students at the mainsite. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We provide Title III to our ELLs. All ELLs are encouraged to participate. We offer CTE and ADL classes to ENL students, as well as CBVI worksites. Students enrolled in CBVI receive services from non-certied ENL teachers at their respective worksite locations. ELLs are welcome to the same services provided to all students. They are invited to participate in all activities, i.e., sports, trips, events, student council, Zumba dancing, drama classes, by teacher communication with parents via phone, through letters translated into their languages, during face to face meeting with students, through counseling services and IEP meeting, etc. Loudspeaker announcements are made in English and Spanish to alert all students of upcoming activities at the school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Each class is equipped with technology, e.g. computers and projectors; several classes have smart boards. All teachers are required to address all learning styles during instruction (visual, hands-on, listening, speaking) and group work is also a required component during lessons. To facilitate language acquisition for ELLs visuals accompany vocabulary which is provided in English and Spanish. We offer our students CTE and ADE classes and instructional trips. Worksheets with images/ or translated in to Spanish are provided to bilingual students. ELL practices are infused into every single lesson plan. Bilingual paraprofessionals translate content and assessments as needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Home language support is delivered in each program through our bilingual libraries, bilingual personnel (paraprofessionals and teachers), technology, translated text, films, video, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Every teacher/selected service provider is required to review all of his/her students IEP's and complete a 408. Instruction is differentiated according to IEP goals. The Next Generation Standards is infused into our school curriculum. Student assessments and readings are modified based on IEP levels. All lessons in all major subjects (English, Math, Science, and Social Studies) are required to include ELA and math components. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Each class is equipped with technology, e.g. computers and projectors; several classes have smart boards. All teachers are required to address all learning styles during instruction (visual, hands-on, listening, speaking) and group work is also a required component during lessons. To facilitate language acquisition for ELLs visuals accompany vocabulary which is provided in English and Spanish. We offer our students CTE and ADE classes and instructional trips. Worksheets with images/ or translated intop Spanish are provided to bilingual students. ELL practices are infused into every single lesson plan. Bilingual paraprofessionals translate content and assessments as needed. 2018-19 CEP 59  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Yvonne Cortes, our Parent Coordinator provides an intake/orientation. Thomas Rosa provides Title III, after school. Counselors provides student orientation. Ms Montolio works with many of out ENL students and serves our 2 mainsite Spanish Bilingual students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). MSCD is an Alternative Assessment school. Only our inclusion students take language courses: Spanish. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently our school only features only a ENL program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? All ELL staff members are encouraged to enroll in the PDs provided by the Department of Education. All MSCD teachers attend daily inquiry team meetings from 8:00am to 8:25am, Monday-Thursday, and Fridays, 8:00am to 9:15am. Staff members (including, but not limited to: the principal, counselors, teachers, related service providers, and paraprofessionals) regularly review the Danielson Framework for teaching and analyze individual student work. On Fridays, staff members who have recently attended professional development and workshops outside of the building turnkey to the staff. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Since our children are in a secondary school program for non-diploma bound learning disabled students, worksite transition is crucial. There is no middle-school-to-high-school transition for them. Our staff mainly helps ELLs transition from the main site to the MTC, usually by the age of 18. During monthly staff meetings and on Chancellor's professional development days, we host workshops about transition, advance, professional learning standards, best practices and curriculum. These workshops familiarize staff with the transition process and the goal of helping our students find gainful employment while maintaining rigorous academics appropriate to their cognitive level. Jose P. Training is provided by the Department of Education and District 75. We currently have an ENL vacancy. The teacher hired to fill to this position will be registered for D75 ENL and LOTE PD's. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All MSCD staff members are required to contact parents on a daily basis. Individual meetings with parents take place on a weekly basis over the phone or at least once per semester outside of mandated parent/teacher conferences. Student IEP goals 2018-19 CEP 60  (the needs and goals of our ELL students) are embedded in their IEP goals and reviewed during these meetings and/or discussed over the phone. These documents are also mailed to parents/caregivers when report cards are sent. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents meet regularly with Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant during school open house and coffee with the principal to discuss all student related matters, including matters pertaining to ENL specifically. Parents also regularly participate in Title III activities. Also, to support the needs of ENL students the school provides parents with access to online programs designed to improve students achievement. Parents are alos offered training on how to access these systems on line. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We currently have an ENL vacancy. As soon as we fill this vacancy our mainsite and 75 Morton street ENL students will receive their mandated minutes as best as we are able given our shortage of ENL teachers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Ewa Asterita 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, 751M, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 75M751 School DBN: Ewa Asterita Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dean of Students Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Yakeen Dinmahammad Yvonne Cortes Vacancy Kaitlyn Stillwagon/Art Melody Tuck/Math Raul Padilla jeanette Montolio Ketler Louissant Thomas Rosa 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75M751 School Name: Manhattan School for Career Develop Superintendent: KetlerLouissant The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Raul Padilla Instructional Coach No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A multilingual welcome poster is displayed visibly at the the entrance of our school. During the initial student admission/intake, the parent is asked to complete the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) in their native language, provided this is the child's first time entering a New York City Department of Education school. On the HLIS document, a parent is requested to indicate their preferred language in receiving oral communication and written information from the school. Consequently, all parents have been surveyed and have been contacted by the Parent Coordinator to determine the language requirements for documents that need to be sent home. In addition, interpretation services will be provided as it is needed in the 15 foreign languages that the Department of Education offers. Translators will be available to come to the school or be accessible by phone with any of the translation or interpretation needs of the ELL parents. During the intake registration process, the preferred written and oral language of family and student is obtained. Through the Model Transition Project, extensive home visits are conducted including informal language surveys. The MTP and Parent Coordinator collaborate to provide a series of workshops and outreach phone calls to parents. In addition, we developed multiple approach using flyers, newsletters, and Voice Shot Bilingual Messaging. We also use the Preferred Language Cross 2018-19 CEP 64  Reference List from ATS. During the intake process, parents are asked language preference and needs. The forms are kept in the students' records. Information is transferred to ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC CHINESE FRENCH MANDARIN ENGLISH SPANISH Mandika Wolof 2 4 1 0 155 67 0.73 2.03 0.51 0 78.68 24.36 2 4 1 0 154 68 0.51 0.51 1 1 0.51 0.51 0.73 2.53 0.51 0 78.17 24.73 1 1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. At this time we don't have any parents preferred languages representing at least 10% except English and Spanish. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families School Event Calendars; Parent workshop flyers, Parent-teacher conference announcements; The Parent Handbook: The School Messenger (Spanish); NYSESLAT; Regents and NYSSA testing dates; The Intake Package; Trip Forms; Parent Teacher 7/5/2018 8/3/18 9/5/18 translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation services will be utilized 2018-19 CEP 65  10/5/18 11/5/18 12/3/18 1/3/19 2/4/19 3/4/19 4/4/19 5/3/18 6/3/18 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences @ 751 Mainsite [High school] Parent Teacher Conferences @ 75 Morton [Middle school] The first series of conferences are held on November 29, 2018, in the evening and November 30, 2018, in the afternoon. The second series of conferences are held on March 7, 2018, in the evening and on March 8, 2018, in the afternoon. The first series of conferences are held on November 27, 2018, in the evening and November 28, 2018, in the afternoon. The second series of conferences are held on March 26, 2016, in the evening and on March 27, 2016, in the afternoon IEP meetings Annual ENL Teachers & Parents Meetings in person or on the phone at least 4 times per year, not to be held during parent teacher conferences. Interpretation services will be provided by staff on site. Interpretation services will be provided by staff on site. Interpretation services will be provided by staff on site. Interpretation services will be provided by staff on site. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 66  Utilize multilingual staff and/or utilize translation hot line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. CR A-663 is presented during Chancellor PDs and are included in our School Handbook. Staff know how or where to access translation services for parents, [i.e., NYC DOE website, LAC or Parent coordinator or administration. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibility is available and posted in the main lobby, main office and in key locations throughout our facility at MSCD. In addtion, our school provides safety plan for parental information. If these forms are not available in the parent's native language, a special request will be placed with The Translation & Interpretation Unit. The complete information about the ELL Department is available for parents via the DOE link. The Translation & Interpretation Unit will be contacted for translation of other languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator as needed. The parent coordinator is aware of parent's needs. ATS reports on language preference are reviewed once a month to ensure that parents language needs are being met. During parent teacher conference language preference is offered. We rely on the data from the NYC DOE Parent Survey to improve on our services to all parents including parents of ELL's. Feedback forms are provided after each workshop--forms are translated into Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 67 
