2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M896 School Name: LOWER MANHATTAN COMMUNITY MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: KELLY MCGUIRE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information LOWER MANHATTAN COMMUNITY 02M896 3102000010896 6-8 26 BROADWAY NY, NY 10004 646-826-8100 School Number (DBN): 646-826-8101 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: KELLY MCGUIRE KMCGUIRE@LMC896.ORG School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: KELLY MCGUIRE Valerie Leak NICKI FRANCIS NAOMI DANIELS NAOMI DANIELS NA Rachel Oakes District Information BONNIE LABOY Superintendent: 333 7 TH AVENUE NY, NY 10001 BLABOY@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: MANHATTAN Field Support Center (FSC) YUET CHU FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 TH AVENUE 8 TH FLOOR NY, NY 10001 YCHU@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KELLY MCGUIRE Valerie Leak NICKI FRANCIS NA NA NA NA Viola Varner Amy Kanter Wendy Turner *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT 2018-19 CEP 5  SETH KRITZMAN ShannaDouglas Cat Acevedo Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview “At Lower Manhattan Community we get to know our students and we give them what they need to be successful.” This mission and vision statement for our school is rooted in a belief that all students present different learning strengths and needs, as well as different interests and personalities. It is our responsibility to find out who our students are, as individuals and as learners and to cater our instruction and school program to meet their needs. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Lower Manhattan Community Middle School works to support an enormously diverse group of 385 students in Lower Manhattan. While approximately half of our students come from families of lower incomes, the other half is made up of middle and upper middle class students. While the geographic area from which our students matriculate from elementary school is not large, the neighborhoods in which our students live (the Lower East Side, Chinatown, the Financial District, TriBeCa) are enormously different. We feel this diversity presents our school with an enormously unique opportunity to bring students from different backgrounds together. The diversity of our school presents a real opportunity to teach students life skills that will benefit them well-beyond the years of middle school. Our school has grown a great deal over the past 5 years – from 240 students to now approximately 385. This growth has enabled us the opportunity to expand our arts program offerings to four (digital arts, visual arts, dance, and music). We see the expansion of these arts programs as one of the key ways in which we are “giving our (diverse) students what they need to be successful.” Lower Manhattan Community MS has a unique and well-established team structure that is accompanied by a group of very-capable teacher leaders and coaches. Facilitating all professional workshop and training decisions is a team of teachers that are part of the Instructional Leadership Team (ILT). The ILT meets approximately every other week to set policies, develop strategic learning plans for the staff, and discuss the progress of the school toward goals. Participants on the ILT include 3 grade level team leaders, 4 department team leaders, our guidance counselor, and the two-person administrative team. Last year the ILT split into two separate committees that met regularly over the summer. One committee worked on curriculum and instruction goals and interventions and the other team worked on school climate topics. Emerging out of these committees were a set of school wide goals and accompanying action plans for achieving the goals. Part of the work of the climate committee included the development of a revised “kid-talk” protocol that the team uses to study the work of students in school. Also emerging from the ILT’s summer work was a revised “trio” protocol that teams of 3 teachers use to direct a peer observation and feedback cycle which we plan to facilitate three times per year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Of these 385 students approximately 30% are students with disabilities. While this large number of learning differences can be a bit daunting when we think of the varied learning needs of our students, the number of students with learning disabilities means that we must develop our professional learning and school staffing / program to accommodate such needs. Three years ago we expanded to two ICT classes per grade level, thus allowing us greater continuity in staffing and greater flexibility with support and program offerings for students with disabilities. When our school moved from Greenwich Village seven years ago the number of students currently classified as English Language Learners (ENL) and former ENLs increased dramatically and currently the number of ENL or former ENL students at our school is between 25 and 30 percent. To respond to this need we have increased staffing resources, as well as professional supports for all of our teachers relating to supporting the needs of ENL and former ENL students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Last year we were visited by an evaluator for the purpose of fulfilling our three year Quality Review. Additionally our superintendent as a part of the PPO evaluation. Feedback from both visits were in alignment. There were a number of aspects of our curriculum, instruction, and environment that were praised, however, from both visits the evaluators determined that we should focus on using student assessment data to better target instruction to individual and groups of students, particularly in mathematics. In this CEP we are seeking to accomplish this through the Framework dedicated to rigorous instruction. We will also continue to develop professional learning for our staff members and build capacity for our students to problem solve and communicate. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M896 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 385 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 4 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 39 4 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 57.0% % Attendance Rate 54.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 16.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.26 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 69.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 79 79 96.8% 3.4% 27.5% 10.9% 42.6% 2.3% 2 13% 6.7 62.7% 82% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● We have worked toward developing the routine use of formative assessments to identify student needs and differentiate instruction. ● As a part of our trio team process, teachers routinely shared lesson plans for peer review. ● We have developed trust amongst staff members through the development of a clear school-based protocol that supports teachers to review classroom observation data in an objective way with a focus on the observed actions instead of judgement of teacher decisions. ● We hold regular community and family events to showcase school curriculum, including shifts in Common Core practices and ways that we have adjusted our instruction to meet these goals. ● All departments have established common, standards-aligned outcomes. ● Departments have established baseline, interim, and end of year assessments that measure progress toward common core standards ● The proficiency rating for students is represented by a steady increase on State Assessments over the 3 years of middle school ● The proficiency rating of students on established department assessments increases steadily throughout the year in all grade levels. ● We will continue to support the math and literacy proficiency of our students with disabilities through the planning and implementation of rigorous instruction. ● We will continue to support the advanced performance of our strongest students through the planning and implementation of rigorous instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 we will increase the percentage of students school wide who are proficient in English by 5%. We will increase the percentage of students school wide who are proficient in mathematics by 5%. These increases will be based on a snapshot of State Exam proficiency levels taken in Fall 2018 and will be measured by the results of the 2018 State ELA and Mathematics Exams. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through a series of parent-focused events, we will ensure that parents are aware of models of rigorous instruction and corresponding student work. All events will be facilitated by bilingual staff and parent volunteers. These events will include examples of student work and performance tasks that reflect the high expectations we are seeking for our students. Parents and families Implement the use of formative and summative assessment tools that will enable teachers to elicit student performance data that will enable them with the ability to target learning needs for all students. Teachers and students Literacy Coach, Assistant principal, Math facilitator, PTA All teachers and school administrators September 21st, January 30th, March 14th September 21st, January 30th, May 10th Develop a portfolio of student work in literacy and mathematics through which high quality, common core aligned assessments are used to evaluate student performance and growth can be reviewed Students and parents September-May Teachers and administrators Starting with 6th grade and school wide humanities, develop use of online portfolios through which students set goals, measure improvement, and report on progress through student-led conferences Students, parents, teachers September - May All teachers and school administrators. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through a series of open classroom events we call "LMC Open Classroom" parents will be invited to view classrooms in session. Workshops on specific content will follow Open Classroom events. Similar workshops will be shared following our PTA meetings. During our student-led conferences, advisors will share exemplar work products with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 15  Tax levy dollars to support per session time for teachers and teacher leaders to develop workshops for families, as well as to support time for family workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -By November, we will have hosted at least two events during which parents are trained on the characteristics of high quality so that they are better prepared to evaluate whether or not their child’s work is meeting CCLS as measured by agendas, parent-sign in forms, and feedback from parents on a written survey that is translated into Spanish and Chinese. -By November, we will have evaluated the academic and social performance of our students by comparing last year’s / start of year grades to present performance in order to evaluate whether or not our students’ grades are improving as measured by an an analysis of performance data from November 2017 to November 2018 - By November 2018 we will have hosted at least 1 round of student-led conferences as measured by parent sign in forms, sample work from students, and agendas and minutes. -By January, 2019 we will evaluate student progress of our students performing in the lowest third, through an analysis of benchmark assessment data, course grades, including work habits, and academic skills as measured by an analysis of student data using Excel. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Grade level team review of student progress following the administration of January, benchmark assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In addition to the school learning environment survey, our school conducts extensive surveys with students, families, and teachers. These data reveal that students feel safe in school, are respected by their peers and teachers, and participate in a wide variety of activities that interest them. Teachers, according to surveys that are both internal and facilitated by the Central NYCDOE indicate that they would most certainly recommend our school to families and friends. This is backed up by the fact that all of our staff members who live in New York City and have children in District 2, send their kids to LMC as their first middle school choice. One area that we are working to improve this year is transitions around lunch time. We have many students going out to lunch or to the cafeteria. We are seeking to tighten up those systems which may be unclear to students or teachers around supervision during lunch time. Last year our school SLT engaged in extensive surveying of families. These surveys included paper surveys, online surveys, and face to face interviews. We also employed a large group of Mandarin speaking parents who volunteered to interview Mandarin-only speaking parents about their experience at LMC. - Internal surveys and Citywide School surveys indicate that in addition to "reduce class size", families would like "more rigorous courses" as an area for school improvement. - Interviews with 20 LMC families by the school leadership team reveal that parents are interested in their children engaging in more self-motivated projects. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of students will respond either "agree or strongly agree" to the question, "I have been challenged in my classes." as measured by the NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By January 2019 100% of all students will present an aspect of their learning in front of peers and parents Teachers, Parents and students September 2018– June 2019 School admin, parent coordinators, all teachers Interim assessment and school grades will be evaluated to determine the level of progress for all students and action steps will be designed by grade level teams Teachers in conjunction with famiies September 2018– June 2019 School admin, parent coordinators, all teachers Work with students to design online portfolios across the 6th grade and in all humanities courses Teachers, Students Host two rounds of student-led conferences where by students set personal goals based on portfolio data and work and evaluate progress. Teachers, parents, Students All staff All staff September 2018– June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be shared following our PTA meetings with a focus on highlighting various content areas. These workshops will focus on unpacking the Common Core standards and connecting LMC classroom practices to expectations highlighted in the standards. During our student-led conferences, advisors will share exemplar work products with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy for 3 teacher release periods per year to facilitate meetings, train students, and evaluate portfolio data and progress. Tax levy monies for per session funding to support staff workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June, 2019 90% of parents will agree or strongly agree with the statement, "My child has been appropriately challenged in his/her courses" as measured by the NYCDOE School Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● We have made great strides in the sharing of instructional practices with our colleagues, however, we need to look more into how our work is having an impact on individual students. ● We have developed trust amongst staff members through the development of a clear school-based protocol that supports teachers to review classroom observation data in an objective way with a focus on the observed actions instead of judgement of teacher decisions. ● We hold regular events to share school curriculum, including shifts in Common Core practices and ways that we have adjusted our instruction to meet these goals. ● All departments have established common, standards-aligned outcomes. ● Departments have established baseline, interim, and end of year assessments that measure progress toward common core standards ● Departments share major and minor student assessments and work to align instructional expectations vertically. ● The proficiency rating for students is represented by a steady increase on State Assessments over the 3 years of middle school ● The proficiency rating of students on established department assessments increases steadily throughout the year in all grade levels. ● We will continue to support the math and literacy proficiency of our students with disabilities through the planning and implementation of rigorous instruction. ● We will continue to support the advanced performance of our strongest students through the planning and implementation of rigorous instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 21  By end of the year, we will have completed 2 effective trio sessions (within dept., with at least one special educator in each trio) working around lesson modification for struggling students, as well as through a systematic review of student work as measured by teacher survey in which at least 80% of teachers report satisfaction. By June 2019 85% of teachers will report that grade level team meetings are an effective tool for improving the performance of students performing in the lowest third as measured by staff survey. Interim surveys will be administered mid year via online survey. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop a key protocol to be used during trio team meetings that builds trust amongst teachers by focusing on classroom observation data. All teachers September 2018– June 2019 ILT, school administrators Facilitate the re-design of trio teams with a focus on reviewing lesson plans and student assessments. This year we will include a review of both teacher practice using video and student work using a protocol to review pre and post data All teachers Scheduling trio team activities All teachers September 2018– June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 Evaluate rounds of trio team activities 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers September 2018– June 2019 ILT, school administrators ILT, school administrators All teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-19 school year we will use a portion of our parent involvement time to focus on the attendance of students in our lowest third. We will seek to improve on time arrival and attendance for students who have a history of 10 or more combined latenesses and absences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy funding will permit summer and extended time planning. Tax levy funding for additional video cameras to conduct recording Professional development time allocated to three rounds of team meetings focused on Trio team observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● We will survey teachers following each trio team meeting using an online survey program ● In December 2018 we will conduct a large-scale survey of teaching staff to determine progress toward this goal as measured by an analysis of survey data ● We will evaluate teacher performance connected to Danielson components to determine change in teacher proficiency. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School designed survey using Google dos Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. - We have steadily increased contact with our students' families over the past three years. - We hired a second parent coordinator who is trilingual in order to better communicate with non-English speaking families - We seek to share both concerns and positive student progress with families. - Last year our students received on average, 1.75 positive contacts from their teachers throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019 the number of school staff members participating in teacher leadership will double from the current number. This will be measured by leadership committee minutes. By June 2019, every child in our school will have received at least 3 positive contacts from teachers that focus on academic achievement / improvement or positive engagement with peers and adults. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Share examples of high quality positive parent emails. Set up monitoring dock in order to accurately track positive parent contacts. Teachers / Staff Teachers / staff September 2018 School administrators September 2018 School administrators Set aside grade level team meeting time during which teachers are scheduled to write positive parent emails Teachers / staff September 2018 School leadership team Evaluate progress of positive emails 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers / staff December 2018 School Leadership team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will seek to invite a greater number of parents to our SLT meetings. We are hoping to gain feedback on processes for conducting parent learning circles, as well as develop a team of trained parent facilitators. Through parent leaders we will facilitate increased dialogue with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher professional time FSF funding for per session for leadership team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will have received at least 2 positive emails from LMC staff / teachers as measured by an online tracker that we have connected to our family directory By June 2019 all students will have received at least 3 positive emails from LMC staff / teachers as measured by an online tracker that we have connected to our family directory Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online grade level spreadsheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● LMC is extremely culturally, linguistically, and economically diverse ● Parents regularly attend parent conferences, evening presentations of student work ● Non-English speakers rarely attend PTA sponsored events ● The school relies on some online resources that are available only in English Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will initiate 5 or more events and activities through which we will increase the number of parent participants in PTA and school sponsored events as measured by PTA, SLT, and ILT agendas. By June 2019 we will facilitate 3 opportunities for parent leaders to chair workshop discussions with families. This will be measured by a review of minutes from SLT meetings and "open classroom" events. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Train and orient staff on the use of writing comments in Jumprope Develop a system by which positive parent comments will be shared with non-English speaking families All Staff Sept 18 Administration All Staff Sept 18 Administration Develop a series of Jumprope workshops for families All Families Sept 18 Administration, PTA, SLT, parent coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will seek to invite a greater number of parents to our SLT meetings. We are hoping to gain feedback on processes for conducting parent learning circles, as well as develop a team of trained parent facilitators. Through parent leaders we will facilitate increased dialogue with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for second parent coordinator who is trilingual and can communicate with all families. Set aside time for assistant principal to conduct workshops for families. Jumprope, online grading system will be one focus for our instructional work. We will meet on Wednesdays for 40 minutes to engage in purposeful parent engagement and participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 29  By February 2019 we will have held at least 3 events and activities through which we will increase the number of parent participants in PTA and school sponsored events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of parent involvement calendar by school PTA Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Smaller group reading courses, direct instruction, in class modifications and supports Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Exam score lower than 2.2 or did not meet promotional criteria from previous year AND / OR Fountas and Pinnell reading level 2 years below GL State Exam score lower than 2.2 or did not meet promotional criteria from previous year Students with grades below 2.2 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group instruction, remedial or preview of lessons to be taught. Small group instruction Repetition of key curriculular concepts. Small group instruction Students with grades below 2.2 Repetition of key curriculular concepts. More than 5 demerits, attendance below 93%, self / family reported behavioral / emotional concerns Counseling, community service group participation (matadors, student council) Small group instruction Small group instruction During the school day and after school After school After school During school day and after school 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Lower Manhattan Community Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Lower Manhattan Community will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Lower Manhattan Community , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 39  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 41  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Lower Manhattan Community MS Borough Manhattan School Number 896 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kelly McGuire Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cesarlina Aviles Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Benjamin Geballe Coach type here School Counselor Seth Kritzman Parent Cynthia Savino Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 382 2018-19 CEP 44 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.12%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0PrograLangm TBE TBE TBE DL . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 11 012 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment is used to assess the early literacy of all ELLs. This assessment gives insights to the ELA/ENL and reading teachers on what reading materials will be provided to the ELLs and reading comprehension skills activities will be incorporated to the lessons everyday. In addition, "just right book" assessment is also used during a 1-on-1 conferencing. The ELLs' reading level and their corresponding NYSESLAT-Reading/Writing results are also taken into consideration since these would guide the school’s appropriate instructional planning and strategies, reading materials and interventions. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 45  The ELA/Humanities Department has a implemented a school wide Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment which all English and ENL teachers are trained and responsible of administering the reading test. The data gathered is being shared to all teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school evaluates the success of the ENL program by looking into the ELLs' grades, progress reports, and NYS ELA and NYSESLAT test results. The NYS (ELA, Math and NYSESLAT) test results will determine what additional instructional planning will be improved and what additional after school programs be probably implemented. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All data gathered, such as NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, NYS Math, and MOSL results are placed in a spreadsheet which is being shared to all teachers. Through this sharing of data, teachers can analyze what interventions should be implemented to ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that 65 percent of the ELLs have Expanding level of proficiency and are in the program between 3 to 6 years. Students with transitioning level of language proficiency are in the program for less than three years if not long-term ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Through the use of ELL Data Analysis Tool, ENL teacher shares the most important ELL data gathered to all teachers and coordinates with content teachers on how to support the ELLs in their respective classes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction for ELLs is delivered to ELLs of the same grade level through Flexibility programming (a combination of Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL). The ENL teacher will push-in/pull-out ELLs in each class either in ELA or Social Studies classes. The ENL teacher is certified in Math, Math with SWD and ESOL. The ELLs will benefit more in a flexibility ENL programming because they are being supported in different content areas of studies. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 46  An ENL instruction is delivered to ELLs in each class through push-in/ pull out method. Push-in sessions are done during ELA or Social Studies classes. Pullout sessions are done for specific standard that requires a separate location and longer time for the ELLs to complete such task. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English is the medium of instruction in all core subjects. Common core content teachers use several instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to foster language development, such as charts and pictures, sentence strips or speaking and writing prompts, and vocabulary study or word definitions. ENL teacher coordinates with the core content teachers on scaffolded materials ELLs use for easier understanding on specific lesson in each content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, ELLs will take NYS Mathematics and Science tests written in their first language. If a test is not available in the student’s L1, the school hires an interpreter of that language, and orally translates the written test to the students. Throughout the academic year, glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and online language translation are available for the ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students will receive similar low-level text compared with the other students. Visual aids and graphic organizers are used to support content understanding. The use of technology will be provided for translation purposes and online reading programs that support reading comprehension and pronunciation skills. b. ELLs who are Newcomers will receive differentiated texts according to their reading levels. During classroom discussion, they will be grouped with high functioning native speakers to socially develop their academic speaking skills. Graphic organizers will be provided, as well as visuals aids and technology. c/d. ELLs with more than 4 years in the ENL program will be provided with graphic organizers, sentence prompts, visual aids and the use of technology. Level texts will be provided according to their proficiency levels. In school-wide setting, all former-ELLs and current ELLs [SIFE, Newcomers, ELLs receiving 4-6 years, and long-term] receive support services such as academic intervention, homework help or tutoring, reading and writing skills enrichment. Throughout academic classes, differentiating instruction includes the following: instructions are written and verbal; peer explains the directions as well; give language supports such as sentence starters; create small groups for targeted instruction; some acting/role playing; visuals with simple text; sometimes (infrequent) translation; strategic partnerships, one- on-one support and the use of several visual cues and audio/graphic texts to support more language dependent texts; shared text is available in the native language; strategies are modeled for students with visual aids when needed and think-aloud; the student works in a smaller group to insure peer interaction; explicit teaching; a second teacher works with the smaller group to practice the skills taught; graphic organizers and extended time are given to practice strategies taught. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs-SWD use different instructional strategies that correspond with the IEPs. To maximize learning time and teacher's supports, all ELLs-SWD are placed in ICT class. A variety of instructional materials and the use of technology are utilized to best meet the needs of the ELL-SWD population. Different genre study, guided reading, independent reading 2018-19 CEP 47  materials such as "just right books", and literature circles are used to strengthen literacy skills. Through these materials, ELLs improve language acquisition through learning new words and apply in writing and speaking activities. ENL utilizes series of grammar books, real life stories books and picture books, as well as internet resources, which add visual support better understanding of the concept presented in class. Dual language dictionaries and computers for online translations are available in each classroom to support students’ native language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs with low English proficiency levels are placed in ICT classes where two teachers teaching in the class. The ENL teacher also collaborates with core content teachers regarding strategies and materials appropriate to ELL-SWDs. In addition, ENL, SETSS and the other service providers share schedule flexibility in serving ELL-SWD. Every service provider of ELL-SWD uses the information from SESIS and collaborates to provide appropriate instructional activities that would lead to achieve ELL-SWD IEP goals and attain English proficiency at the same time. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The whole school has three periods per week embedded schedule for a targeted-reading intervention for 6th grade ELLs and non-ELLs. The reading intervention program was designed based on the recent NYS ELA result. The reading intervention uses fiction and non-fiction texts, focuses on developing comprehension skills of the ELLs and applies appropriate strategies for the activities. In addition, an after-school program was also designed for the ELLs who performed below standards in NYS ELA and Math tests. Science and Social Studies teachers provide support to ELLs as needed, either before school, after school or luch time. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? More academic and language support materials and online programs being a school that incorporates technology in class will be implemented to fully support growing ELL population in their academic and language needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No ELL services/ programs will be continued. The school ELL program, ENL, will continuously be offered. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Through the school website, all school programs are indicated for easier accessibility by all parents. In addition to the school website, flyers are also given to students describing all school programs available, as well as apllication letter, in English, Chinese and Spanish. All 6th grade ELLs can access all Arts program while 7th and 8th grade ELLs are to specialize an Art program where they have to stay for two-full academic years and in Spanish class too. The school also offers after-schools program such as Homework Help, sports, cooking and different Arts classes. Academic and non-academic activities offered in after-school program help ELLs improve language skills through speaking and listening with other native English speakers. ELLs' social and communication skills are also enhanced in the after-school activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Classroom teachers use computer, Smart-boards and document projector in presenting lessons, worksheets and reading texts to all students, ELLs and non-ELLs. Differentiated worksheets and reading texts are prepared to address different students’ learning capability in academic or language acquisition. In Mathematics, tiered worksheets are provided and vocabulary-enhanced reading texts in ELA, Social Studies and Science classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For ENL program, bilingual glossaries for Science and Math terms and bilingual dictionaries are provided in each class. Each classroom has desktop computers, which ELLs can use for online translation of sentences or group of words to better support 2018-19 CEP 48  them in language acquisition and understanding of academic words. Teachers also create classroom materials by incorporating visual cues in reading texts and writing tasks. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Instructional materials and supplementary fiction and non-fiction texts are carefully selected to correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels and English proficiency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Classroom teachers use computer, Smart-boards and document projector in presenting lessons, worksheets and reading texts to all students, ELLs and non-ELLs. Differentiated worksheets and reading texts are prepared to address different students’ learning capability in academic or language acquisition. In Mathematics, tiered worksheets are provided and vocabulary-enhanced reading texts in ELA, Social Studies and Science classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A "buddy system” will be in implemented to assist newly enrolled ELLs, where the new ELL is paired with a student who speaks the same home language and can support the ELL in class. A designated teacher or the ENL teacher will follow-up on this “buddy system” and make necessary changes when necessary through out the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish as a Foreign Language is offered to 7 th and 8 th graders. ELLs are learning another language in addition to English and their first language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are encouraged to attend PDs offered through DELLSS. Schedule of PDs offered through DELLSS and other related PD’s for ELLs offered through the network are shared to the school staff. There are also grade level meetings and department PDs that addresses some issues of ELLs and discuss appropriate strategies needed to support the ELLs inside the classroom and become successful. In addition, Pupil Accounting Secretary or ENL coordinator attends PD on ATS/STARS related matter that would help obtain accuracy of ELL data. Each department/grade level team meets once a week to discuss CCLS, collaborates, share different strategies and may discuss current educational research about students (ELLs or non-ELL) and identifies ELLs who might need academic and language support in addition to classroomm learning time. In addition, the ENL teacher will be sent to off-site professional development courses that will be offered by DELLSS. The ENL can chose can several PD courses for ELLs from an email sent by the DELLSS and must be approved by the principal. 2018-19 CEP 49  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As a middle school, some of the ELLs transition to high school a continuing ELLs. The Guidance counselor and the ENL teacher support the 8th grade ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school by guiding them in identifying appropriate high school that can continue supporting them with academic and language development. In addition, the school Guidance Counselor coordinates with the parents of the ELLs to talk about high school admission/application and the best high school for these students. The ENL teacher/ coordinator receives a list of PDs from DELLSS appropriate for all teachers serving ELLs. The ENL teacher will register to ELL-specific professional development offered from the DELLSS with principal’s permission. For offsite PDs, copies of attendance certificate/agendas will be given to the School Secretary for proper documentation, as well as the ENL teacher will keep records of all the PDs attended during the school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school plans to have a mid-year meeting with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This is an opportunity for parents of ELL to speak with the ENL teacher and understand how the services is provided and what to expect while the student is still in the program. Letters (English or a translated version) will be sent home as invitation for the mid-year meeting, A follow-up call will also be done to ensure that the message has been received in timely manner. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. LMC has school activities that requires parent involvement, such as volunteering or chaperoning students’ activities outside school. ELL parents are invited to volunteer during a school-wide activity such as Thanksgiving Potluck where they have a chance to showcase their native dish. Other activities that involve parents’ participation are Meet-the-Teacher Night/Curriculum Night, parent teacher conferences, Talent Show, and more. Spanish and Chinese translators are availble during these acitivites. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kelly Mcguire, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lower Manhattan Community Middle School School DBN: 02M896 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kelly McGuire Title Principal Benjamin Geballe Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Cesarlina Aviles ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cynthia Savino Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m896 School Name: Lower Manhattan Community MS Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school ensures that all parents receive school information in the language of their choice. The Parent Coordinator and the Pupil Accounting Secretary maintain a home language identification survey (HLIS) data, which shows parents’ language preference in all oral and written communication. This information is continually updated throughout the year. HLIS is used to assess written translation and oral interpretation needs. LMC provides all official written/electronic correspondence and telephone messages in English, Spanish and Chinese. In addition, Chinese and Spanish speaking staffs are always available to assist parents who come to school for specific purpose 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 53 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Mandarin, Cantonese, Spanish. At the start of each school year we conduct a survey with all studnets in every classroom and ask children to indicate their languages used, those of their parents, and whether or not their parents communicate electronically, in writing, etc. using a language other than English. ATS reports are evaluated whenever a new student enters the school or at the start of each school year to determine langauge history of the family. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. LMC provides English, Chinese and Spanish translation of all documents and communication sent home to families. The Translation and Interpretation Unit or in-house staffs provide Spanish/Chinese translations of all written communication or documents to be sent home with the student. Documents that are translated 2018-19 CEP 54  include the student handbook, curriculum overview materials, field trip forms, and all weekly newsletters from parent coordinators and school administration. Fall parent-teacher conferences are November 17 th and 18 th , Winter conferences are March 16 th and 17 th. One month prior to every conference we reach out to families and volunteers to support translation and interpretation for these conferences. Teachers sign up for translators two weeks prior to conferenes. All interpretation is handled by in-house staff who speak and write the languages in which the families of our students communicate. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We will hold 4 annual events related to parent-teacher conferences. We also hold 3 curriculum nights per year highlighting a different academic or arts subjet area. Finally, we will hold two high school information nights. Translation and interpretation will be available for all of these events. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All translation and communication are translated and interpreted to meet the needs of our students and families. Calendars, notices, and other written communications are handled in-house by bilingual staff members. Interpretation is managed by hired translators for sensitive meetings, including IEP meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and other curriculum or evaluation meetings. Events that are of a celebratory nature, we hire translators, but also pair second language families with those who are bilingual - speaking English and the second language. Teachers are able to reliably schedule interpreters and translators for all meetings using either hired translators or in-house staff members. . Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? All parent surveys, including those that we conduct in-house are translated for families. Additionally, we data from surveys with members of our parent body, including bilingual families. 2018-19 CEP 56 
