2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q002 School Name: P.S. 002 ALFRED ZIMBERG Principal: AMY GOLDMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 2Q 343000010002 K-5 School Number (DBN): 30Q002 75-10 21 Avenue, East Elmhurst, New York 11370 718-728-1459 Phone Number: 718-274-4332 Fax: Gina Serafin GSerafin@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Amy Goldman Salvatore Anzaldi Tracy Dorish Gina Serafin SuzanaDzaferovic NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 30Q Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Room 518, Long Island City NY 11101 PCOMPOS@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718 391 8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amy Goldman Salvatore Anzaldi Tracy Dorish SuzanaDzaferovic EleniBelitsis NicolettaDeJoseph *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anna Sfakianos Gina Serafin Kristen Lantry Veronica Watkins Member/ PARENT Member/ AP Member/ Teacher Member/ UFT- Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.S. 2Q is to provide a solid academic foundation coupled with shared human values. We will maximize the distinct intellectual and humanitarian potential of every student, thereby preparing all students for college and career. This aim is to be achieved by utilizing the expertise and talents of all staff and students; garnering extensive parental participation; creating access to current materials and technology for all students; and by taking advantage of the unique resources within our community by fostering partnerships with organizations and individuals that can help support our students’ growth. Our goal is to nurture every individual student’s gifts and abilities. P.S. 2 works diligently to impart to all children that there can be no success without hard work. Students should be curious, hard-2018-19 CEP 9  working, self-disciplined, and interested in being problem-solvers. P.S. 2 students should also be honest, kind, respectful, and tolerant of differences. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 2 is a community school situated in East Elmhurst, Queens, in a culturally diverse neighborhood. Our population consists of students that are- 20% Asian/Indian, 2% Black, 37% Hispanic, and 40% White/Arabic. Our special populations consist of 16% ELL and 17% SWD (Students With Disabilities). Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled, and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 85%. We are a school that is consistently ‘In Good Standing’ (2017-2018 scores will be updated when released). We foster partnerships with Studio in a School and Wingspan Arts to incorporate the Visual Arts and Dance instruction, as well as CUNY's Creative Arts Team- Cultural After School Adventures for a drama program in grades 3-5. We work closely with our NYPD NCO's (Neighborhood Community Officers) on safety initiatives and they collaborate with our Student Council. We have also incorporated Enrichment Clubs school wide, with a variety of options for students to select, including languages, origami, yoga, band, sculpting, and crochet. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One of our student populations with special needs are our English Language Learners. These children make up almost a fifth of our school and range from Entering to Commanding. Our focus is to employ strategies that would be successful for all of our English Language Learners while at the same time aligning their instruction to the rigor of the Next Generation Learning Standards. Based on the work of Advanced Literacy skills, and Educational Consultant Maryann Cucchiara, we work on ENL strategies that help students decipher complex texts for the 3 ‘L’s- language, literacy, and learning. The strategies involved have been so successful that we have taken them building-wide. Our English Language Learners faired ‘ Excellent ’ on closing the achievement gap on our most recent School Snapshot. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One area we are continuously working on is building Strong Community and Family Ties. This year we added several forms of communication with parents so that they can feel that they are more apart of school instruction and events. We understand that in order for children to be successful they need to have a bridge between home and school that is supported by all members of the community. Our Administration has made many changes that affect this, including a school website (www.PS2Q.org) which is updated continuously to provide information on upcoming events, parent notices, and curricular information. We have a Global-Reach telecommunications systems so that all parents and guardians are sent updates and reminders of important events. This year we added an email blast system to every parent for spontaneous and important messages. Our parent coordinator runs workshops on a regular basis to inform and attract parent participation. We have instituted a weekly curriculum overview for all parents by grade electronically. We have a weekly parent meeting time, and our teachers maintain logs of communication that reflect this. We also send out interim progress reports in between report cards. Our PTA Executive Board meets once a month with teachers (on a rotating basis) to discuss any issues and upcoming events. With all this we are always looking for ways to increase communication and provide support for all of our parents in order to ensure the success of every one of our students. On our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide we went up to a score of 4.12 in this area. An area in which we do well, according to the Framework, is Collaborative Teachers . Our teachers meet a minimum of twice a month for inquiry work and have at least one common-prep a week to plan. Each grade has 4-6 teachers depending on the special needs of that grade, including one self-contained ENL classroom teacher, and one ICT class. Working together each individual brings their own strengths and insights to the table. The inquiry work is focused and pertinent as the teachers follow a template that encourages them to look at student work for trends around the same area of focus. Teachers also meet at least once a month for vertical inquiry work which is inter-grade, helping 2018-19 CEP 10  teachers to plan based on where their students need to be in the future. According to our School Quality Guide we scored a 4.38 for collaborative teaching. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q002 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 568 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 25 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 64.8% % Reduced Lunch 16.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 36.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 39.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.2 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 56 93.9% 8.3% 18.1% 2.6% 19.5% 1.4% 4 0% 7.7 66.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2017-2018 State Exam data shows 65% of our students meeting the standards for their grade on the state ELA exam, and 66% of our students met the standards for their grade on the state Math exam. In addition, our Advance Summary for the 2017-2018 school year shows 75% of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective for 3C. 2. Our school has begun professional learning around the Next Generation Learning Standards and Advanced Literacy skills. Teachers need further exposure and opportunities to develop familiarity and knowledge of the NGLS, as well as aligning instruction to the NGLS. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 60% of the staff will have awareness of the Next Generation Learning Standards, specifically in ELA and Academic Language, as evidenced by observations and walkthroughs, student work and assessments that show students' use of tier II academic language more consistently and correctly on written tasks and class discussions. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development focusing on the NGLS, Advanced Literacy Hallmarks, instructional rigor, questioning and discussion techniques, and differentiated instruction. All staff members Administrators and lead teachers Monday afternoon PD and Chancellor PD days Performance tasks at the end of each thematic unit that assess higher order thinking, periodic assessments three times during the school year Students Ongoing Classroom Teachers Problem of the Day in math to promote critical thinking Students Classroom Teachers Every day during math period Focused Instructional Walkthroughs that include peer to peer intervisitations Students & Teachers Once a month Administrators and Teachers Grade level meetings Periodic Data Analysis Student language folder/notebooks Teachers Students Students Students highlighting Tier II and Tier III words in writing Students Classroom Teachers Administration All teachers All teachers At least once a week Fall, mid-year, end of year January 2019-end of year January 2019-end of year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold parent workshops on the expectations of the Next Generation Learning Standards in addition to the two Curriculum Nights scheduled in September and May. Workshops will be scheduled in the Spring, before State testing. All parent curriculum events will be presented by classroom teachers, and supervised by administration. We will also post weekly curriculum letters by grade on our school's website. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitutes for inter-visitations, DOE and District PD sessions, and planning sessions; supplementary materials for trade books and mathematical word problems. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Advance observations and informal walkthroughs should show evidence of teacher implementation and student application of elements pertaining to the NGLS; some indicators may be language work, rigorous writing and math real-world skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) As measured by periodic assessment results (i.e. IReady, Performance Series, and Running Records), and Advance data results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Our school's strengths include:  On the School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 we scored a 4.80 for safety, 4.44 for classroom behavior, 4.29 for the Social-Emotional measure, and 4.45 for peer support for academic work.  On our most recent Quality Review (2015-2016) we scored "Well Developed" for School Environment. 2. Our attendance rates are below District averages for students with 90% attendance or better. We are currently at 86%. 3. Our priority is to maximize the success of all students by implementing best practices and strategies for social emotional intelligence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will show an improvement of at least 2% attendance for chronically absent students, as reflected in our school accountability and attendance data. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD to staff on Mental Health Training PD to staff on Social Emotional Intelligence All staff All staff Ongoing Guidance, NY Health Ongoing Guidance, NY Health Student Assemblies (Orientation, Student Council, Respect for All) All students grades K-5 September-February Administration Respect for All Week Full time guidance counselor Enrichment Clubs take place every Thursday, period 7 Daily phone calls All students grades K-5 All students and staff All students grades K-5 Chronically absent students Parent Workshops for Anti bullying, attendance, and Nutrition Parents February NY Health liasion, guidance counselor ongoing Administration Ongoing ongoing Teachers grades K-5 and specialties School Aides & teachers February 4, 6, 7 Parent Coordinator and Administration Attendance team meetings Chronically absent students At least once a month Team members (staff) Teachers attendance folders to monitor patterns All students daily Classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our full-time Parent Coordinator invites all parents to workshops on social emotional well being throughout the year. Our Saturday Academy for students simultaneously offers stress reduction for parents. Administration will oversee parent workshops (see above, attendance on file in Principal's office), and will work closely with our Parent Coordinator to schedule and retain attendance and minutes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  We hired a full time Guidance Counselor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At mid-year, we expect to have conducted at least 1 training session, led by Guidance and NY Health, obtaining at least 35% of staff trained. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Guidance Counselor ilog events and OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.  On the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot we received a rating of 4.69 for Teacher Collaboration  On our 2015-16 QR we received a ‘Well Developed" for teacher teams  Our 2015-2016 QR reflects a well developed for 4.2 Teacher Collaboration  On our Framework report for 2017-18, we scored 97% for Peer Collaboration, 93% Quality Professional Development, 95% School Commitment  We have implemented the use of a teacher team template that incorporates looking at previously tried strategies and student trends in order to focus inquiry  We have monthly vertical (inter-grade) and department level inquiry team meetings  Teachers can use the 35 minute teacher time on Tuesdays (3:00-3:30PM) for weekly inquiry team meetings; in addition to common prep time 2. There is still a need to increase teacher to teacher collaboration and intervisitation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of teachers will have conducted peer to peer inter-visitations with a guided focus based on our PLCs (Professional Learning Cycles) which have an emphasis on the Next Generation Learning Standards and Advanced Literacy Hallmarks; as measured by written feedback to their peer and an increase in student performance on end of unit assessments. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common preps All grades Work-sessions for vertical and inter-grade meetings Teachers Teacher team template and minutes Monthly focused walkthroughs (by administration or peer to peer voluntarily) Teachers Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Monthly 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Administration Administration and Teachers Teachers and Administrators Administration and Teachers Semester meetings by grade to provide feedback to teacher teams. All Teachers 10/2018 - Teachers 6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly curriculum letters will be submitted to our website (by grade), which are created by a collaboration of grade team members. Administration reviews and posts letters weekly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitutes to allow inter-visitations and reflections among teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February 2019, 35% of teachers will have conducted peer to peer intervisitations with a guided focus. Administration will continue to ensure continuity of the impact of this work by reviewing informal and formal assessment results, teacher intervisitation logs, and reflection meeting minutes and teacher intervisitation logs and reflection meeting minutes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Intervisitation logs and students results of informal and formal assessments, as well as Advance observation ratings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.  All observations (both formal and informal) were completed, with feedback session, by the end of May 2018.  Advance data for 2018 final MOTP scores for teachers show 42.31% Highly Effective, 48.87% Effective, 8.62% Developing, and 0% Ineffective.  According to our 2017-2018 annual survey and School Quality Guide, we scored 3.91 for Effective School Leadership. 93% of teachers say there is inclusive leadership, and 93% Instructional Leadership.  Our State Exam scores for students performing at levels 3 and 4 in Spring 2018 will be included when released. 2. Purposeful and meaningful PLCs are necessary in order to have a meaningful effect on teachers professional growth so that instruction optimizes student cognitive engagement and success. Integrating the demands of Advanced Literacy and the NGLS is a priority for our students success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have conducted at least three Professional Learning Cycles (PLCS) that support the NGLS (I. Assessment II. Academic Language III. NGLS awareness), by delving into coherent inter and intra grade standards, as evidenced in teacher unit plans, Teacher Team Inquiry work, student work and assessments, and Monday PD agendas and minutes. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional focus PD will reflect areas where a majority of staff have shown a need for improvement on Advance summary reports Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators and Lead teachers NGLS planning sessions Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration and Teachers Observations with post meetings for verbal and written feedback Administration 9/2018-4/2019 Administrators Learning walks focusing on NGLS and Advanced Literacy Hallmarks Administration 9/2018-4/2019 Administration and Teachers PLCs will be on topics that include, but not limited to: Advanced Literacy Hallmarks (4Ts), NGLS (Next Generation Learning Standards), Student Cognitive Engagement (3c) All Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held to inform parents of the demands of the NGLS (Meet the Teacher, Parent/Teacher Conferences, Literacy Fair, etc.). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Subs to cover teachers for grade level planning, and subs for mid-year reflections and EOY reflections between teachers and administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students will show a greater command of tier III vocabulary, writing skills, and math word problems and utilize tier III vocabulary across content areas as aligned to the NGLS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance summary reports, IReady, Ed Performance, performance tasks, running records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.  On our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide we received a score of 4.25 for Strong Family and Community Ties.   We include many more venues for home-school communication including web based weekly curriculum Family Fun activities conducted 2017-2018: Read Aloud, Math games, Art, Dance, and more. overviews, PS2Q Email blast, and multiple Progress Reports to parents  We are utilizing STARS for report cards  Implement periodic assessments with detailed result reports for parents 2. Parents need greater opportunities for volunteering and participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, communication between staff and parents will increase in both quantity and quality as measured by parent surveys and attendance at events and committee meetings that encourage parent participation. These events and committees include but are not limited to: monthly PTA Executive Board meetings, monthly General PTA meetings, Graduation committee, Fundraisers, and more. We will also present opportunities for parents to volunteer and become more immersed in the day to day school environment. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher logs of parent meetings for Tuesday afternoons Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and parents Tuesdays 2:20-3:00PM Teachers will give copy of logs to administrators Curriculum overview to parents weekly during common prep Teachers Weekly Teachers Monthly PTA Executive Board Meetings attendance and minutes Monthly PTA General meetings PS2Q Website with fliers on all events, virtual suggestion box, website feedback forum, weekly curriculum overviews, parent volunteer sign up, and more. PS2Q Email Blast 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, parents, students, administration Teachers, parents, students, administration All PS2 Community All PS2 Community Monthly Parents, teachers, and administration Monthly Parents, teachers, and administration Administration Administration Updated throughout year: 8/2018-6/2019 Updated throughout the year: 8/2018-6/2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are currently working with HANAC, to support families in the community. We have the following Arts Partners that also support our families and community: CUNY Creative Arts Team CASA, Studio in a School. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  Translation money for Progress Reports, Online Periodic Assessment tools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At mid-year, two Progress Reports will have been sent to parents in between Report Cards as indicated by teacher survey. In addition, the PS2Q Email Blast, will have more than 50% parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys, our online suggestion box; and minutes from PTA Executive Board meetings, will indicate the increase in opportunities for volunteering and participation. In addition, we will monitor volunteer numbers and attendance at events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State exam results, teacher recommendation, RTI and SIT Team referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1.Reading Street (Pearson) leveled texts 2. Writing to Source (Pearson)- argumentative and informative writing 3. Saturday Test Prep 4. RTI Teacher- Gr 2-5.Fundationsphonics Mathematics State exam results, teacher recommendation, RTI and SIT Team referral 1.Go Math (HMH)- CCLS aligned program 2. Saturday Test Prep 3. RTI teacher- Gr2-5 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1 and 2- During the school day 3 Saturdays- in the spring (dates TBD) 4 During ELA block daily 5 During the school day 1. During the school day 2. Saturdays-in the spring (dates TBD) 3.During the school day 1 and 2- Delivery method daily according to UDL principle I; Differentiated instruction in small groups 3 Two Saturdays in March 2018 9:00-11:30 AM smaller class size 4 Daily small group AIS with classroom teacher 5 Small groups of students performing at level 1 1. Delivery method daily according to UDL principle I; Differentiated instruction in small groups 2. Two Saturdays in April 2017 9:00-11:30 AM smaller class size 3. Small groups of students performing at level 1 2018-19 CEP 28  Science Teacher judgement, unit assessments Social Studies Teacher judgement, unit assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent request, SIT or teacher recommendation (with parent consent) CCLS aligned units delivered according to the principles of UDL, including technology, leveled nonfiction texts, and differentiated activities CCLS aligned units delivered according to the principles of UDL, including technology, leveled nonfiction texts, and differentiated activities Guidance Counselor- play and art therapy, role play, and discussions. During school time Tier I intervention delivered by the classroom teacher at least twice a week During school time Tier I intervention delivered by the classroom teacher at least twice a week Guidance Counselor- small group, 1:1, and classroom presentations During school time Psychologist (M, W, F)- at-risk counseling Psychologist- 1:1 counseling 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 15 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All services provided to the school population are provided for the STH population. In addition, we provide book bags and school supplies for students in temporary housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our District's HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed periodically by the principal and the Human Resources director who works with our school to ensure that every teacher's assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract highly qualified teachers to our school include: Frequent communication with our District Human Resources Director when vacancies occur.   The District Human Resources Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. The Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges to locate highly qualified candidates.  The school participates in Central Hiring Fairs where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited.  The school establishes a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in the search of HQT candidates.  The school engages in interviews with HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool.  The school establishes a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and a review of New York State certification/licensing.  The school maintains a professional library to promote promising and effective practices.  The school provides teachers with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities designed to ensure high quality instruction.  The School's instructional and professional development cabinet meet once a month to review PLC goals and implementation in order to ensure high quality professional development for all staff members. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 32  Professional Development is delivered whole group, by grade level, and individual according to need. Staff surveys are conducted, and observation data is analyzed in order to plan PD. All PD is aligned to the Citywide Instructional Expectations and instructional shifts in order to insure that it is CCLS aligned. We also review teacher effectiveness best practices, by reviewing Danielson elements and domains and having teachers share an example of a strategy that is highly effective. We also conduct PD weekly on Mondays from 2:20-3:40PM. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We begin our Kindergarten year with an orientation session for parents and students with the child’s classroom teacher. At this session all services, curriculum, expectations, and concerns are discussed one-on-one. We also conduct a Meet The Teacher program within the first few weeks of school by class so that parents can learn how they can support their child academically. Any child that is coming in with an IEP from pre-school will have their services reviewed by our psychologist so that they are placed appropriately and that there are no gaps in service that the child requires. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers were consulted by grade as to the programs (ELA and math) and assessments (periodic) they would prefer. The programs they selected, Reading Street (Pearson) and Go Math (HMH), have chapter and unit assessments that help guide instruction. Administration meets with teachers by grade to review the most beneficial way to utilize the programs, assessments, and teacher’s guide. A coach was hired to support ELA and math instruction, mentor new teachers, and turn-key and act as resources in these areas. Through PD days, Monday afternoon sessions, common preps, and work sessions (where subs are hired so that teachers have extra time to plan together) teachers share the latest best practices across CCLS aligned curriculum lessons and units. 2018-19 CEP 33  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 237,005.00 57,414.00 12,366.00 TBD 3,317,042.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 CEP 34   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 2, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 2 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Meet the Teacher, Literacy Fair, and other special events ● maintain a Parent Resource Center/Area (room 131B); instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 38  PS 2, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are made available to parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We will be offering an after-school program to ELLS in grades 2-5 in the spring for 13 sessions (Jan 3, 10, 17, 24, 31, Feb 7, 14, 28, Mar 7, 21, 28, April 4, 11) . The sessions will run 2 hours from 2:20-4:20 on Thursday afternoons. The classes will be taught by 4 certified ENL teachers, and 1-2 teaching teams including a Special Education certified teacher working with a certified ENL teacher. They will teach reading and math skills such as reading fluency, reading comprehension, understanding complex texts, math numeration and operation, word problems, and real world application. This will be implemented through ENL strategies and best practices, including language work and listening and speaking standards. Materials (Finish Line NY ELLs program by The Continental Press) will be purchased to reflect these skills (only for the after school program). We are also going to be conducting a Saturday Academy for students in grades 3-5 to enhance reading comprehension skills and math word problem analysis and application in the spring of 2019 (One class per grade with a ratio of 15:1). Our ENL students will be instructed by a certified ENL teacher on skills and strategies in math and ELA on 2 Saturdays (One ELA class on March 30th, one Math class on April 13) from 8:00 am-12:00 pm. Each ENL teacher will be responsible for attendance for the group at each meeting. Parents will be notified in English and Spanish for all students in grades 3-5. We have language translators available to help explain in person or in writing in our three main languages outside of English (Spanish, Arabic, and Greek). With the implementation of these programs last year, 52 out of 103 total ELL students achieved an increase in level status on the NYSESLAT, with 21 students testing at a Commanding level (This update will be revised, as NYSESLAT results come in for FY2018). As these programs are for ENL students, all instruction is in English, with minimal supports in native language as needed. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At least once a month during the Tuesday 3:00-3:35 work session, ENL teachers will meet to share best practices. In addition, teachers will be covered with subs so that staff can meet by grade, both in class to view lessons and in work sessions, to review and discuss language work best practices and instructional strategies. Our certified ENL teachers that will be teaching the ENL after-school program will attend ENL professional development in NGLS aligned best practices, and to support the outside PD (For example BFSC Queens borough North PD- 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Building Vocabulary: Tools and Strategies Integrated into all Content Areas) and labsite/debrief model for our ENL department. We will continue PLCs on NGLS and building academic language vocabulary, as per the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy. The impact of this professional development will be through turn key and shared best practices with practical application so that ENL strategies can be experienced by as many ELL students as possible. Thereby increasing vocabulary and English language skills. PD agendas and descriptions for outside sessions are maintained by payroll secretary, an Assistant Principal, and notes by teachers. In house PD and minutes are maintained in the Principal's office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to the ENL parent orientation, where parents meet the ENL department and Parent Coordinator, we offer several workshops for parents to attend. The workshop information is disseminated via multi-lingual fliers and a telephone outreach program. In conjunction with the parent coordinator, certified ENL teachers will conduct workshops on the Common Core Curriculum and guidelines for the State exams (ELA, Math, NYSESLAT) with certified teachers available to translate (if needed). There will be 6 certified ENL teachers conducting four workshops (Fall K-2, 3-5 and Spring K-2, 3-5) on Thursdays for one hour each (2:30-3:30). Each session will have 3-4 teachers, and we will provide refreshments that will not exceed $250. We will also be purchasing the RAZ Kids reading program for our 6 ENL classes, for after-school/home use for reading and language acquisition. About ten percent of our total funding will be used for per session for certified ENL teachers conducting the workshops and the RAZ Kids program. Karen Caroccio, our parent coordinator distributes a parent survey requesting topics of interest to them. In order to maximize participation of parents of Title III students, we have translators available upon request. Our Parent Coordinator acts as our Language Access Coordinator and maintains records of all parent workshops and agendas. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 2018-19 CEP 45 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Alfred Zimberg School Borough Queens School Number 002 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amy Goldman Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angela Proios/ENL Grade 4 Teacher/Subject Area Justin Klee ENL/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Julie Vulkej ENL/Special Ed. Related-Service Provider Stephanie Nieves/Speech Superintendent Dr. Composto Assistant Principal Gina Serafin Coach N/A School Counselor Christine Chatel Parent Mrs. Husseini Parent Coordinator Karen Caroccio Field Support Center Staff Member Evelyn Mosquera Other (Name and Title) Kristen Lantry (Grade K ENL) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 0 5 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 47  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 589 Total number of ELLs 104 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs (English Language Learners) are Fountas and Pinnell running records, performance tasks, I-Ready (grades K-2), Performance Series (grades 3-5) , the NYSITELL (New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners) and NYSESLAT (New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test.) Additionally, Go Math has the beginning of the year test and baseline assessments that are utilized. An item analysis is then conducted to drive instruction for that year. Our reading program Reading Street, has a baseline assessment that assesses sight words, vocabulary and comprehension. Teachers analyze data in each of those three categories to determine areas of instructional need. The data derived from these assessments help inform our school's instructional plan by providing necessary information to address the specific skills needed by our ELLs in order to attain grade 2018-19 CEP 48  level literacy. Running records help us identify the reading level and types of miscues for each ELL student; results have shown some ELLs are below standards for proficiency with complex texts. Performance tasks are administered at the end of every math unit and twice a year in literacy and are graded based on a four point rubric which is aligned with the New York State Expository Writing Rubric. Teachers then use checklists to break down a task into smaller pieces and monitor progress along the way. Student growth is further analyzed throughout the year in each sub-category for a performance task (conventions, organization, command of language.) The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores inform our instructional plan by providing information about which students are considered entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding. The EDAT tool is also utilized to determine which modality (listening, reading, writing, or speaking) each grade needs the most assistance with as evidenced by the scores from the year before. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support our efforts in guiding instruction we have several supports in place. First, our data specialist (Ms. Gina Serafin) runs the EDAT report and meets with each teacher individually to discuss the results of the NYSESLAT from the year prior. An instructional plan is then created to address areas of need. Teachers are also given planning time to make adjustments to their units of study and of curricular materials based on current assessment data. This planning takes place during common prep periods and additional time is allotted on Election Day and Brooklyn Queens Day. Additionally, the ENL department meets monthly during a vertical alignment meeting to discuss current trends and data as per ongoing assessments. Instructional strategies are then brainstormed and the team implements various strategies, implements them and then returns to the team to debrief. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school utilizes several summative assessments. We utilize performance tasks at the end of each unit. An item analysis is conducted that looks at each trait on the rubric. Teachers then look for trends and meet as a team to determine strategies that target these given areas of weakness. Our school also uses Performance Series which provides a grade level equivalent for each students' progress.. Each child's growth is analyzed. A classroom skills analysis is also generated that shows which skills and standards students have mastered and the corresponding number that have shown mastery. As a result, teachers use that data to determine future areas for re-teaching and/or small group instruction. The results of the NYSESLAT are also analyzed. By using the EDAT tool, we look at each grade and look for trends in performance in the four modalities (listening, reading, speaking and writing.) Then, we determine our next steps. As per our findings from the 2017 NYSESLAT, for our current first graders we found that speaking was a strength. On the other hand, listening was an area of weakness. In our current second grade, students performed the best in speaking and the lowest in reading. Our third graders performed the highest in writing/speaking but the lowest in reading. In fourth grade our students performed best in speaking but need to work on reading/listening Lastly, our fifth graders strength was in speaking but areas of need were reading, listening and writing. Therefore, as a school our areas of strength and need widely differ and should be addressed on an individual basis. Our school also utilizes I-Ready for grades K-2 which serves as a benchmark assessment. Performance is measured in phonological awareness, phonics, high-frequency words, comprehension of literature and comprehension of informational text.and a class-wide analysis is conducted to determine areas of instructional focus. In math, students are assessed in strands that include: number and operations, algebra and algebraic thinking, measurement and data and geometry. In addition, Go Math and Reading Street each have unit tests that assess student understand. Furthermore, there are mid-chapter checkpoints in math and weekly tests in reading as per the Reading Street curriculum. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been collected, we have several methods for providing intervention. Tier I RTI is provided within the classroom through a strong instructional core . We also have three providers that provide Tier II RTI in small groups. These students receive targeted instruction using researched based programs such as Fundations and Spire. Our Student Intervention Team (SIT) team, meets weekly to discuss students progress based on the interventions. After six weeks, the team will check- in to determine if the student would benefit from further RTI instruction, has made adequate gains, or if there is a possible need for further intervention (at-risk services or possibly a referral for special education.) 2018-19 CEP 49 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework by focusing on the relationship between instruction, assessment, and intervention. All classes are expected to provide a strong instructional core. Interventions for ELLs begin with Tier I services. Within Tier I, classroom teachers use high quality, rigorous reading instruction that is aligned to the Common Core Standards. They use research based methodologies and customize instruction to meet the needs of the ELL students and ensure positive outcomes. Classroom instruction is differentiated to meet the students' individual needs. A screening assessment is administered to determine whether students require additional support. Based on the data collected, students demonstrating patterns of concern (as flagged by the EDAT tool) are provided with increasingly intensive interventions to proactively address their difficulties in through RTI. Tier 2 (double dose) and Tier 3 (intensive intervention.) Tier II intervention is provided by: the SETSS teacher, a general education teacher that pulls small groups, or a speech teacher; all of whom are appropriately certified-. Tier 3 intervention is provided by a special education teacher trained in multi-sensory literacy instruction In these tiers instruction is targeted to address specific student needs and provides explicit instruction in various skills and competencies. Performance and achievement are monitored regularly to assist school staff in determining whether students are making progress. This progress monitoring is charted and discussed at the SIT (School Implementation Team.) Interventions and instructional strategies are adjusted or continued, depending on information gathered from both formal and informal assessments. Every Wednesday, at the SIT/RTI team meeting, students progress is reviewed regularly and decisions about how to best meet each child's educational needs are discussed. Throughout this process, parents are notified of their child's progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns based on the NYSITELL and NYSELAST reveal a significant gap between listening and speaking ability and reading and writing ability. Based on the 2017 NYESELAT, 17.3% tested at the commanding level. There were 46.2% students who scored at the expanding level. 23% scored at the transitioning level. 10.5% scored at the emerging level and 3.8% at the entering level. For our current ELL fourth graders: On the 2017 third grade ELA exam 46% of third graders scored a 1 on the ELA exam,. 54% of third graders scored a 2,. 0% of third graders scored a 3 and 0% of third graders scored a 4. On the 2017 third grade math exam 40% of third graders scored a 1 on the math exam, 46% of third graders scored 2. 13% of third graders scored a 3 and 7% of third graders scored a 4. For our current ELL fifth graders: On the 2017 fourth grade ELA exam 12.5% of fourth graders scored a 1. On the ELA exam, 75% of fourth graders scored a 2. 0 % of fourth graders scored a 3 on the ELA. 12.5% of fourth graders scored a 4. On the 2017 fourth grade math exam 27% of fourth graders scored a 1 on the ELA exam, 27% of fourth graders scored a 2. 36% of fourth graders scored a 3 on the math exam and 9% of fourth graders scored a 4 on the math exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school makes adjustments accordingly in several ways. The ENL team meets once a month to discuss student progress and to analyze student work and curriculum based on current findings. We analyze the data from the NYSESLAT so that the ENL teachers can place emphasis on whichever modality requires the most instruction. Our data specialist (Ms. Serafin) meets 1:1 with teachers to discuss their students performance on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. This report for the Math/ELA state exam lists each Common Core Standard and the percentage of students that answered those questions correctly. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In grades K-5 students except those in grade 4 that scored at the entering or emerging level receive 1 unit (180 minutes) of stand-alone and 1 unit of integrated ENL in a self-contained ENL class taught by a teacher certified in ENL teacher. This totals 360 minutes. Students in grade 4 receive all minutes by a push in ENL teachers. Students at the transitioning and expanding level meet their requirement for 180 minutes through.5 unit (90 minutes) of stand-alone and .5 unit of integrated ENL. All classes are heterogeneous and have students of mixed proficiency levels. Students that scored at the transitioning or expanding level students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction in a class that is heterogeneously grouped and taught by an teacher certified in ENL. All of the students remain together throughout the entire day. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We will place any ELL student regardless of proficiency level in a self-contained ENL classroom taught by a licensed teacher. Therefore, they will receive more than the minimum number of instructional freestanding and integrated minutes. Additionally, in order for former ELLs to receive the 90 minutes of instruction, or half a unit of ENL instruction, they will receive instruction by a ENL certified teacher for two periods a week. Students at the entering and emerging levels require a minimum of 360 minutes of instruction a week. This is met through a free-standing model. Our transitioning and expanding learners receive 180 minutes of instruction also through a free-standing model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students will receive the required free-standing ENL through as well as integrated units of ENL through English instruction using a variety of methodologies aligning to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Using ENL strategies and methodology such as Total Physical Response (TPR), visuals, scaffolding and teaching academic language through thematic units of study, literary non-fiction, phraseology, figurative language, accountable talk, and word play. In addition, all of the ENL teachers will use a variety of modalities in instruction and activities. Additionally, the teachers will use a variety of strategies to make content comprehensible including pre-teaching, targeting vocabulary, building background and integrating speaking and listening skills into their everyday activities. Differentiated instruction scaffolds skills, allowing students to build upon and expand their English language proficiency. In order to maximize English language acquisition for the ELLs, the ENL teachers work closely together to develop and deliver literacy instruction, as well as differentiated content area instruction to meet the learning needs of all of the ELLs. In addition, a Promethean Board will be used to provide visuals and mechanisms of building background knowledge. Teachers will be able to utilize the ENL components of our core programs: Reading Street (literacy) and Go Math (mathematics.) . These programs include additional components that build language and background knowledge for ELLs. Additionally, both programs have portions available in Spanish. These are used as home language supports for our newcomers. Our school also uses Imagine Learning for our ELLs. This is a technology-based program that provides exposure to vocabulary. 2018-19 CEP 51  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages, we provide students with home language versions of the Math and Science exams when available. A translator is provided to the student when a printed version of the test in their home language is unavailable. Practice tests in home languages are provided to the students when available. Students are permitted to use glossaries with direct word to word translation from English to their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students who first entered an English language school system after grade two with interrupted, little or no formal education in their first language may attend the Title III After school program and Saturday Academy (grades 3-5) for literacy and math skills. Although we have no SIFE students at this time, there are various ways we would differentiate instruction and bridge the learning gap that these learners may have. We would utilize dictionaries and glossaries in order to help these learners communicate. In addition, home language support may be provided to build foundational skills. Teachers will determine what skills these students are lacking based on the results of the Multilanguage Literacy Sife Screener. Then, through small group instruction teachers can provide targeted instruction. Our Go Math program has an intensive intervention kit that could be utilized to support SIFE students. Our literacy program has an RTI kit that provides targeted small group skill-based instruction. Teachers will use sentence frames and visual cues to build communication skills. b. The instructional plan for newcomers who have been in US schools less than three years is to support their English language skills as they are immersed in content area learning. Various scaffolds are used, such as presenting content language in context, using visuals and manipulatives to reinforce concepts being learned. Students are encouraged to use their creativity and prior knowledge to create hands on projects related to content area thematic units. English language skills are taught through the content areas with a focus on vocabulary development. In addition, our Reading Street program includes an ELL handbook which provides differentiated activities to support literacy and language skills. Students are encouraged to develop English through use of technology by using various Internet learning programs such as Imagine Learning which supports language acquisition through differentiated instruction according to each individual student's needs and pace. Students are also taught to use resources and reference materials to promote independent learning. ELA test taking strategies are taught in the classroom. The Title III after school program provides additional ELA skill building and NYSESLAT skill preparation for English Language Learners. c. ELLs receiving service for 4 to 6 years are generally more proficient in Speaking and Listening skills but still require more support in Reading and Writing. Therefore, the instructional plan for these students is to focus on reading and writing skills by scaffolded strategies such as review of basic concepts including decoding, comprehension, and inferences to support reading literacy lessons. Writing skills that are prioritized include forming complete sentences and organizing thoughts into paragraphs by using differentiated graphic organizers. Sentence frames, word banks, outlines and checklists can all be used to support long term ELLs. Literacy skills are taught through the content areas with a focus on vocabulary development through the use of Tier III words, figurative language and complex language structures. Instruction will be differentiated in several ways. Total physical response will be used to teach academic and tier II vocabulary. Visuals and graphic organizers will be used to differentiate literacy instruction. In addition, texts can be modified or read in a small group so they are accessible to all students. In math, differentiation will occur through using a word problem graphic organizer, color coding of steps for word problems and by acting out mathematical situations. Long term ELLs are provided RTI services to address their academic deficiencies. ELLs also receive AIS services if they qualify as per state regulations. Teachers often read aloud texts to model and reinforce creative writing skills.The Internet is utilized as a research tool and students are encouraged to use reference materials and available resources such as dictionaries, atlases, books and websites to support their own learning. The Title III after school program provides additional literacy support for ELLs as well as preparation for state tests. d. Long term ELLs receiving 6 years of service have been held over in a grade. They receive Tier 1 interventions in the classroom and participate in the extended day program as well as the Title III program. They are also given AIS services and if determined necessary by the Student Implementation Team (SIT) they receive Tier 2 RTI services. All service providers as well 2018-19 CEP 52  as classroom teachers differentiate instruction to meet specific needs of these children. e. ELLs that have tested proficient, for up to two years will receive test modifications on exams that include directions reread and time extension. For two years, former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students with disabilities (SWD) that are also ELLS require support within the classroom in content area lessons and enrichment in English language skills. Our plan for each student is guided by the individual IEP. We have several teachers dually certified in ENL and special education. Total physical response, peer tutoring, team teaching, pre-teaching vocabulary are some instructional strategies and approaches used. Through congruence amongst the classroom teacher, the support service provider, and the ENL teacher, all SWD and ELLs have set goals and short term objectives that they work on to meet together. Congruence takes place on a regular basis at weekly SIT and RTI meetings, as well as preps. The program is aimed at the development of oral comprehension, verbal skills, reading comprehension and writing skills. Students are supported within the classroom in small groups during math, science and social studies lessons and encouraged to participate fully in content area lessons. The Wilson Fundations program program and Pearson Reading Street program are used to teach grade appropriate literacy skills. Visuals and manipulatives are used to reinforce concepts being taught. Students that are ELL-SWDs receive the appropriate IEP services and goal oriented instruction from their Special Education teacher while at the same time have their language acquisition instructional needs met by having the ENL teacher provide stand-alone and/or integrated instruction to meet the minimum required number of minutes. In terms of instructional materials, teachers use outlines, picture cues ad checklists to supplement writing units of study. For reading, teachers use the ELL components of Reading Street which emphasize vocabulary and oral-language development through visuals, discussions and explicit instruction in various strategies. In math, teachers utilize the re-teach component of Go-Math to supplement instruction for our ELLs with IEPs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by utilizing a uniform literacy program for all classes and grades. This program (Reading Street has components that build language skills through visuals, explicit instruction in vocabulary, use of Tier II words. In addition, we use mainstreaming for some students to the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE,) modifying lessons with appropriate support as per students' IEPs and combining contiguous grade levels where appropriate. Our students with disabilities that are ELLs are serviced by a teacher that is dually certified in ENL and Special Education. Other ELL-SWDs such as those in an ICT class, receive instruction in an ENL class in order to receive the required number of minutes. Whenever possible, students that can be mainstreamed for particular subject areas based on academic proficiency they are scheduled on a regular basis with a General Education class on their appropriate grade level. Some of our ELLs receive SETSS services. This teacher provides targeted interventions that help build oral language, listening, reading and writing skills. There is also an RTI teacher that is certified in ENL that provides small group instruction for grades K-3. All service providers as well as classroom teachers differentiate instruction to meet specific needs of these children. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA -Saturday Academy- is offered for a total of four Saturday mornings for extra skill instruction from 9:00-11:30AM; it is open to ALL students grades 3-5 upon parental consent. This is open to all levels of ELLs. -Title III ENL After School program for about 12 weeks from January to April for extra skills instruction across the four modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) will be taught in English by certified ENL instructors -AIS students will receive AIS services if deemed necessary by the teacher, SIT team and if flagged by the EDAT tool. Students that score below the medians core between a 2 and a 3 will qualify as well as students who have not moved proficiency levels over the past two years. Currently, AIS is provided for third, fourth and fifth graders in ELA and math. AIS is provided by a teacher certified in ENL and special education. 2018-19 CEP 53  -RTI is another mechanism for giving students support. Students at the entering and emerging levels receive additional small group instruction through tier I of the RTI model in the classroom. RTI is given to K-3 students in ELA. Students struggling in math in grades K-3 work daily with their teachers in a small group. All of these programs provide instruction in English. Students at the entering or emerging level are given small group instruction by a teacher certified in ENL to build vocabulary and academic skills. Math -Saturday Academy- is offered for a total of four Saturday mornings for extra skill instruction from 9:00-11:30AM; it is open to ALL students grades 3-5 upon parental consent. This is open to all levels of ELLs. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math , and other content areas include: -Saturday Academy- is offered for a total of four Saturday mornings for extra skill instruction from 9:00-11:30AM; it is open to ALL students grades 3-5 upon parental consent. This is open to all levels of ELLs. -Title III ENL After School program for about 12 weeks from January to April for extra skills instruction across the four modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) will be taught in English by certified ENL instructors, with an emphasis on Tier II academic language acquisition. Current ELLs at all proficiency levels can participate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Currently, we are continuing to use all of our current programs as they are aligned to the CCLS. After six years of using Go Math, we have modified the program to best meet the needs of ELLs. Teachers plan to add more daily word problems to their daily instruction. Teachers have been using Reading Street but are enhancing the oral language component of the program by using pictures or videos to promote academic language and discussion to launch lessons. They are supplementing the program by utilizing texts that build academic language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs/services for ELLs that are going to be discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's are afforded equal access to all school programs by being included in all programs such as Studio in a School, HANAC, and other grants that we receive that differ from year to year. There is also the Title III ELL after school program (which is exclusively for ELLs), the Saturday Academy program, AIS and RTI. Based upon analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT scores, many students scored at the expanding level. Therefore, we hope to increase our schools performance by providing some extra support through the after school program. Our goal is to help them build their reading and writing skills so that they can become proficient (commanding.) This program allows for a smaller student to teacher ratio. As a result, the teacher can work closely with entering or emerging level ELLs. There were very few students who scored at the entering or emerging levels. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math , and other content areas include: -Saturday Academy- two Saturday mornings to be determined in March and/or April. -Title III ENL After School program for 12 weeks from January to April in the afternoon for extra skills instruction across the four modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) will be taught in English with an emphasis on Tier II academic language acquisition. This is for students at all proficiency levels in a class with a lower student to teacher ratio. -small group instruction via RTI/AIS services- students will receive small group support outside of the classroom in ELA based on student need. Entering and emerging level students can receive RTI to build literacy skills. Based upon analysis of a variety of measures such as the NYSESLAT, state test scores, and teacher input, students at all levels can receive RTI or AIS services. RTI is provided using research based methodologies (Spire reading program) 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students in the freestanding ENL program who are at the entering/emerging levels are encouraged to read and write in their home language as a support as they begin to transfer literacy skills from their home language to English. Also, students are assigned partners that speak their home language during partner work and 'turn and talk' sessions. In addition, students are provided with extra visuals both hard copy and through technology (laptops and Promethean Board). Last year we purchased the Imagine Learning software license for every entering/emerging level student, should funds allow we will continue to do so. 2018-19 CEP 54  We also work in conjuncture with a CBO, Studio-in-a-School, which services our ENL students by providing visual arts instruction, which encourages listening and oral- language development. Manipulatives, anchor charts, bilingual glossaries and hands-on activities support math instruction. Social studies and science instruction is supported through the use of complex texts and scaffolds which support language acquisition and critical thinking skills. Entering and emerging ELLs are supported by using Imagine Learning as well as the ELL component of Reading Street and home language support in math. All levels of ELLs use Continental ELLs book for preparation for the NYSESLAT 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our free-standing ENL program, home language support is delivered by providing students with programs and websites that they can use at home. Students can utilize Go-Math at home and watch videos that provide additional support in English and/or Spanish. Teachers provide letters to the parents explaining each unit of study in order to facilitate their child's learning. These letters are translated as necessary. We do not have a TBE or DL program at this time. Students in the freestanding ENL program who are at the entering level are encouraged to read and write in their home language as a support as they begin to transfer literacy skills from their home language to English. Also, students are assigned partners that speak their home language during partner work and 'turn and talk' sessions. In addition, students are provided with extra visuals through technology (laptops and Promethean Board) or word banks. Last year we purchased the Imagine Learning software license for every beginner, should funds allow we would continue to do so. We also work in conjuncture with a CBO, Studio-in-a-School, which services our ENL students by providing visual arts instruction, which encourages listening and speaking language development. Their socio-emotional needs are met through our Harmony curriculum which includes activities that promote compassion, teamwork and acceptance. In addition, our guidance counselor provides lessons on anti-bullying. Their linguistic needs are met by using word arrays, TPR, sentence starters, word banks, explicit teacher modeling and through visuals. Teachers incorporate a language objective in every lesson to help ensure that our ELLs are building academic vocabulary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service support and resources correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. Resources, materials and instruction are all age and grade appropriate based on the Common Core Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the start of the school year, we host a meeting held in the library by the parent coordinator for any child and their parents who are new to our school. In addition, the ENL orientation is held with multiple sessions by the ENL Teacher (Mr. Klee.) Orientations were held on September 13 in the afternoon and on September 15 in the morning. Our parent coordinator attends these orientations and provides parents with community resources such as Dial a Teacher in order to help our ELLs. Our translators sit down with every parent to ensure that they understand the ENL program and to address any concern they may have. Our school counselor uses role-playing and an anti-bullying curriculum that teaches students to celebrate diversity. She is also available if any student is having difficulty becoming acclimated to their new school setting. She also holds parent workshops on Cyber-bullying. We also host an art activity afternoon on which parents can attend with their children. This will be held in early November. In addition, there is a NYSESLAT workshop prior to the test where parents see sample questions released by the state. We also have an orientation workshop prior to the start of the ENL after school programs. Last, we hold a workshop that explains the New York State test. We have translators available for Spanish, Bengali and Arabic during these workshops. We also utilize parents to translate as needed for lower incidence languages. 2018-19 CEP 55  As soon as students begin in our school the freestanding ENL instructor ensures that the child has a peer whose home language speaker is the same and that they can communicate with that peer. Our parent coordinator makes sure the parent has access to all important DOE information, as well as accessibility in their home language. Our Parent Coordinator sends home a parent survey asking parents what language(s) they would like to receive school communication. We also utilize ATS to prepare a report that lists each child's preferred oral and written language. Our CBO Studio in a School provides art based instruction for our ELLs in grades K-3. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? According to the new regulations, 50% of professional development for ENL teachers will need to involve issues pertinent to ENL instruction. In order to meet these requirements our ENL department will meet once a month on Tuesdays extended day to share best practices. Our first professional learning cycle for all staff will run from September 7 until the end of November and focuses on advanced literacy. At the core of advanced literacy is vocabulary development through the use of word arrays, minimal pairs, total physical response and figurative language. Strategies to embed vocabulary into our daily instruction will be addressed in our professional development every Monday for our first professional learning cycle (PLC.) Advanced literacy also focuses on building critical thinking and helping students analyze texts. This is directly relevant to ELLs. At the core of advanced literacy is a strong instructional core. Professional development will also focus on analyzing the components of our current curriculum for ELLs and ensuring that in the lower grades students are proficient in component skills such as decoding. Teachers of students that are not ELLs will receive the same professional development to ensure that 15% of all PD addresses English Language Learners. Non-pedagogic staff will receive the same professional development In addition, language labsites will take place 3-4 times a year (based on funds) following the work and methodology of Dr. Fillmore and Jeff Zweirs, based on staff development we have received from Maryann Cucchiara, Educational Consultant. ENL teachers will also be encouraged to attend Borough and DOE level workshops as they are offered. Additionally, ELL teachers will turnkey workshops on best practices within the department. ENL classroom teachers attend vertical alignment meetings monthly to align curriculum to grade level standards. In addition to teacher team meetings (2 times per month) to share best practices with their grade level colleagues. Every Monday, all staff members attend PD on teacher effectiveness practices. In addition, our professional development will be given on September 6th launched our first PLC in advanced literacy as well as our instructional focus student engagement. The staff will further investigate ways to build for all of our learners, especially our ELLs. Election Day and Brooklyn Queens day will also include professional development relevant to our instructional focus. Topics that will be explored include: vocabulary instruction, teaching figurative language, building academic language, building critical thinking skills in analysis of literature and engaging English Language Learners in rigorous instruction. We are focusing on Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy. 2018-19 CEP 56  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers of Grade 5 ELLs accompany students to orientation sessions at the middle school in order to familiarize students with the learning environment, expectations, and programs at the junior high level . Our Guidance Counselor will attend PD as available form the DOE and Network to help assist students in their transition to MS and JHS. The new professional development requirements (15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers) will be met through a variety of mechanisms. For example, Monday extended day PD, Chancellor PD days, and work sessions can be avenues to provide this professional development. At each of these sessions agendas, attendance, minutes and handouts are collected and stored with administration. Our first PLO for the 2017-2018 school year is on advanced literacy which address building academic language and vocabulary for our ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent workshops, PTA bulletins, Parent Reach, PTA meetings, and dual language notices keep parents informed of all school activities. Translators are hired for Parent Teacher conferences, ENL parent orientations and on an as-needed basis. Bilingual dictionaries and software were purchased in order to facilitate communication. Our Parent Coordinator surveys the parents both in person and via e-mail in order to meet the needs of our ELL parents. Parents will receive notification for most activities in a minimum of two languages. Translators are available for parents on an as needed basis utilizing the 'Staff Speakers of LOTE' list posted in all rooms in the building. We have the 'I speak card' at the security agent's desk and in the lobby of the school and it is utilized as needed. Annual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program are held on Tuesday afternoons in the beginning of the year. Each teacher reviews the NYSESLAT score with the parent from the previous year. All notices of initial entitlement, continued entitlement, non-entitlement and no longer entitled are sent in English as well as their home language. Parents have another opportunity to be informed of their child's progress at parent-teacher conferences. We have translators available. In January, we have an orientation for our Title III after school program that explains the goals of that program as well as another workshop in March that describes the NYSESLAT. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Records pertaining to annual meetings for ELLs including outreach to parents and other methods of parent involvement in several ways. The HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) will be kept in the students cumulative record. Agendas and attendance pages from the parent orientation will be kept in a binder. The original copy of the parent survey and program selection form will be kept on file in their cumulative record. A copy of the minutes for any meeting with the parent of an ELL student for parent communication time, a parent teacher conference or meet the teacher will be kept by the teacher. Additionally, as per the regulations, an additional meeting will be held to discuss each child's progress on an individual basis. This is distinctly separate from parent teacher conferences. The minutes from these meetings will be kept in a binder. Each portion of the binder will be sectioned off for documents related to each child. Parent workshops, PTA bulletins, parent outreach, PTA meetings, the school website, and dual language notices keep parents informed of all school activities. Translators are hired for Parent Teacher conferences on an-as needed basis. Bilingual dictionaries and software were purchased in order to facilitate communication. Our Parent Coordinator surveys the parents both in person and via email in order to meet the needs of our ELL parents. Parents will receive notification for most activities in a minimum of two languages. Translators are available for parents on an as needed basis utilizing the "Staff Speakers of LOTE" list posted in all rooms in the building. In November, we host a fall activity where parents of ELLs can come and do a craft project and interact with their child and their child's peers. Every month there is a PTA meeting in which parents are encouraged to attend. Parents also are welcomed every Tuesday during parental engagement time to meet with their child's teacher. 2018-19 CEP 57  In January, there is an ENL after school parent orientation that explains the goals of the after school program. In March, all of the ENL teachers meet in the library with the parents of our ELLs to explain the purpose and format of the NYSESLAT. Parents are able to see sample questions that are on Engage NY. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amy Goldman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 2 Alfred Zimberg School DBN: 30Q002 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Goldman Ms. Serafin Ms.Caroccio Ms. Proios Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Husseini Parent Mr. Klee ENL/ Special Educatio Ms. Vuklej: ENL/ Special Educa Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Ms. Chatel School Counselor Dr. Composto Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Mosquera Ms. Sliasky Other Grade K ENL Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q002 School Name: PS2Q Alfred Zimberg Superintendent: Dr. P. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Karen Gina Caroccio Serafin Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registering for our school a Home Language Survey is filled out with a trained pedagogue and the language of preference for the parent/guardian is immediately uploaded into ATS by our pupil personnel secretary. Should the parent need assistance, a building translator is called to assist them at the time of registration. These building translators are found based on a Language Survey conducted amongst the staff that lists all languages staff members speak and where they are located in the building. Then our parent coordinator follows-up with a survey that asks parents/guardians what number they can be reached at ideally (for our global phone calling system) and in what language, which she maintains/updates throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Urdu Bengali Arabic Greek Albanian Portuguese Araucanian Chinese Italian Punjabi 424 78 4 13 12 6 1 2 1 1 2 3 77.51% 14.26% .73% 2.38% 2.19% 1.1% .18% .37% .17% .18% .37% .55% 425 79 3 12 13 6 1 2 0 1 2 3 77.7% 14.44% .55% 2.19% 2.38% 1.1% .18% .37% 0% .18% .37% .55% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Welcome Letter 9/2018 Program Selection Form 9/2018 Report Cards March, November, June IEP meting notices ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Each grade leader submits a copy in June so that staff can translate the letter in Spanish, Arabic and Bengali Use of translated copies via the Intranet As needed translated copy is printed and teacher fills in by hand (Spanish) use of SESIS to print letter in home language as available on SESIS 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher 9/2018 ENL Parent Orientation 9/2018 Title I Parent meeting 10/2018 Parent-Teacher Conferences 11/2018, 3/2019 Parent "mock test" meeting 1/2019 ENL Parent meetings Winter & Spring Literacy Fair 5/2019 IEP meetings ongoing interpretation service(s)? Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. Staff that speak Spanish, Arabic, Greek and Bengali will be available for oral translation. use of staff for some languages, other languages will require the use of the translation and interpretation unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. over the phone translation lines at 1800-231-0288 or 1-855-249-9103 Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School Secretary ensures that ATS records are accurate. The IEP team and special education teachers are all made aware of the translation and interpretation unit so that it can be used accordingly. During our September PD, staff are reminded of the regulations which are also in their staff handbook. Related service providers provide translation as 2018-19 CEP 63  needed. Paraprofessionals are informed of these regulations as they are often used to translate. Our school posts the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities and offers translated versions to parents upon start of the school year. Parent Coordinator attends LAC training as offered yearly. Our school will hold a PD on translation and interpretation services after our first PLC is complete in November. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will fulfill parental notification requires for translation and interpretation services as per Chancellor's Regulations (A-663) in a variety of ways. We will create a welcome poster that incorporates the languages of every student where possible as indicated on the home-language survey. We will display a Parents' Bill of Rights poster in both Spanish, English and Arabic with the assistance of staff/parents with translation. Additionally, the parents of students whose native language is not English will have access to a guide listing staff, parents, or outside resources that they can seek translation from. Lastly, our school will have a Language ID guide at the Security Agent's Desk as well as the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather ongoing feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services for translation on an annual survey as well as feedback at PTA meetings. In addition at our PTA meeting, we will schedule a focus group that evaluates the effectiveness of current communication between the school and our students' families. This group will include translators so that all participants can feel validated. 2018-19 CEP 64 
