2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75Q004 School Name: P.S. Q004 Principal: MARCY BERGER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P4 307500014004 Pre-K – 8 School Number (DBN): 75Q004 196-35 Peck Ave, Fresh Meadows, NY 11365 718-264-0916 Phone Number: 718-264-1205 Fax: Marcy Berger Mberger3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Marcy Berger Paula Thomas Beth Dalton Paula Thomas n/a n/a n/a District Information KetlerLouissant Superintendent: 400 1 st Ave, New York, NY klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  D75 - Queens Ketler Louissant FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 400 1st Ave NY NY 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 212-802-1688 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marcy Berger Paula Thomas Beth Dalton N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Marilou Perez Cleo Tindal Marcia Sampson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Co-President Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diana Padgett Karen Ashton Melissa Diaz Melissa Mazdra Luisa Darrow Susan Seo Sheryl Jones Laura Denning Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: We believe that all students can learn and are entitled to the best education possible. To this end we endeavor to foster an educational environment that takes into account the needs, interests and abilities of the individual student. We recognize our responsibility to promote positive self-awareness among our student body, and to develop those educational skills, which will maximize and enhance the potential for student academic achievement in all curriculum areas. It is our responsibility to prepare students to acquire the necessary academic and vocational 2018-19 CEP 9  skills to become successful, productive citizens in our society. This can only be accomplished in partnership with home, school and community. Our vision for P4Q involves the collaboration of administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers and parents working together in conjunction with the community to make positive, educational and social differences in the lives of our students – always striving to "Reach for the Stars." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P4Q is a special education, District 75 school with 415 students from Pre-kindergarten through grade 8. The school population is comprised of 27.4% Black, 31.5% Hispanic, 11.08% White, and 26.02% Asian students. The student body includes 16.62% English as a New Language (ENL). The student population includes students with Autism, Emotionally Handicapped, Learning Disabled, Intellectually Disabled and Pervasive Developmentally Disabled (12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1, and PK 12:1:2 and 8:1:2). Boys account for 81.44% of the students enrolled and girls account for 18.55%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 90.4%. Teacher teams, collaborations and the use of meeting protocols have been in place at P4Q for years. Common preps enable collaboration with logs being completed for each professional conversation. The views and perspectives of teacher leaders make a substantial contribution to school-wide decision making. The school culture supports teachers/paraprofessionals in acquiring and exercising skills of leadership. Administrators have served as models and mentors. Staff is encouraged to participate in grade conferences, teams, committees, etc. In keeping with the Citywide Expectations , the School Development Committee (SDC) continues as an administrative assignment including principal, teachers and paraprofessionals from all sites to provide meaningful professional development (PD). SDC implements PDs themes and topics, ensuring that staff has a voice in determining what is needed to improve student outcomes. The SDC meet bi-monthly or monthly and email each other at the sites sharing ideas During 2017-2018, "Rethink" was used to cultivate shared methodolgy and common language among all stakeholders. A feedback form was created to acquire staff opinion regarding reflections and suggestions for future professional development. The focus for 2018-2019 will be incorporating a monthly theme by grade bands (i.e. ELA, Math, technology, etc) and using an online Professional development website. For the 2018-2019 school year, through a School Based Option (SBO) vote, professional development Monday and Tuesday extended day staff hours will continue for the fourth year, continuously aiming to raise the bar for staff and readying the school for instructional shifts. Staff continue to request time for professional development and professional conversations to help them better understand the use of data for instruction to promote higher student achievement and understanding on how to read and implement an individualized education plan including parent and student voice. While the SDC committee focuses on PD for staff with an impact on increasing student performance, the P4Q Inquiry Team focus is working to analyze genuine student work, rubric scores and next steps needed to increase student learning. With 13 staff members from all sites and grades represented, standard and alternate assessment staff involved, grade level collaborations focus on analyzing, assessing student work and correlating lesson plans. The goals for both committees is that in providing PD for all staff (paraprofessionals, related service providers, teachers, administrators) P4Q will increase its building capacity and in turn, generate better outcomes for students. Both groups, periodically meet together and then share with staff on extended and professional development days. The participation on the Inquiry Team is through a school-wide posting with per session money allocated in Galaxy to cover their after school activities. Staff meet 1x/month and have incorporated technology into their meetings via "Skype" to minimize travel hardships. In accordance with the Capacity Framework of Community Ties, P4Q has always partnered with cultural institutions. This year, Project Arts connected with Disney, Lincoln Center, Flushing Town Hall, Music for Many and New Victory Theater. Students visit those places and, in some cases, residencies have come into the school. Project Arts determines ways to equitably divide funds among the sites. Four (4) of our five (5) sites are participating in the Disney 2018-19 CEP 10  Grant for 3 years, this being the final year. Forty five (45) students were selected from throughout the organization to perform the “Alice in Wonderland" at school, providing our students an opportunity to learn, create and perform through theater and dance. At our P4@270 site, two students' art work was displayed at the Queens Borough Arts Festival. In addition, one of their student's artwork was displayed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art for the P.S. Art 2018 Exhibition. This piece was also chosen to be the artwork on all student badges who attended the opening reception. Title III money was used to connect with “Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (L.E.A.P.),” focusing on using simple and effective activities to help students improve communication, socialization and academic learning through integrated arts based approaches with English Language Learners (ENL) students and their families in a program held on seven Saturdays beginning in the fall. Additionally, professional development was provided by and for the staff including the English as New Language (ENL) teacher, the alternate placement paraprofessional, the on site administrator and several classroom/coverage teachers. Hosting college interns, across the sites is also a partnership of which we are proud. Connections with Touro College, Queens College, Hofstra, Adelphi University and Mercy College enable interns to spend any time from 6 hours to 15 weeks with us, depending upon the requirements of their school. For over 11 years, at P4@179, a partnership with St. Francis Preparatory HS enables us to host a Big Brothers/Big Sisters program. These HS students come to P4@179 several times a week, providing 1:1 tutoring and emotional nurturing for our elementary special education students. . As part of encouraging fitness, a Soccer Clinic, through D75, continues with students from 213Q. For the past two years, the P4@213Q students come to P4@179Q, using the gym and with the help of 2 soccer coaches, learn the basics of kicking, passing and playing the game. P4Q continues to participate in Achilles Kids. All participating students received new sneakers after walking 26.2 miles. Other programs/contests included, Autism Awareness Day, Mighty Milers, Hoops for Heart, Jump Rope for the Heart and We’re Walking Here. The Physical Education (P.E.) teachers at the main site write a monthly P.E. Newsletter regarding exercise, and healthy eating. Recycling and Health Advocacy Program is a program which teaches students the importance of recycling and how that affects the environment. Gardening through a greenhouse (P4@Skillman) and collaboration with the “Smiling Hogshead Garden” volunteers to beautify unused parcels of privately owned land in the community. These students with autism have also learned to grow their own food including tomatoes and cucumbers and enjoyed making their own salads. The students also learned how to compost used foods. In addition to the P4@Skillman site, P4@179 and P4@213 continue to work with the gardens, having been awarded the “Grow to Learn” and “Health and Science Through Gardening” grant. The Seeds of Friendship garden at our P4@213 site continues to bloom and P4@213 and PS 213 continue as a Collaborative School Community due to the gardening and the "Just Say Hi" initiative done as a shared experience with both schools. At P4@Skillman, we run a CHAMPS (Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated, and Positive Students) program. The CHAMPS Sport and Fitness Program is an initiative of the New York City Department of Education that promotes physical activity among children going through the critical years of middle school. There were fourteen students that participated and three of them were ELLs. The focus of the program was fitness, hockey and tennis respectively for each trimester. These activities, developmentally appropriate, encourage sportsmanship, communication, teamwork and socialization skills. P4@Skillman created a diorama that demonstrated knowledge of the impact of the Neolithic Revolution as a culminating SS Project. It was displayed at the New York Historical Society during the second annual Social Studies Fair for District 75. The Social Studies committee, which consisted of teachers from across all the sites, collaborated together to adapt the New York City "Passport to Social Studies". Together, they implemented the differentiated curriculum to address the various students' needs and learning styles. This committee created several "Units of Study" 2018-19 CEP 11  for our alternate and standard assessment students. They will continue to work diligently through the 2018-2019 school year. The school’s culture has affected how individuals treat one another - the expectations staff have for their own and others' behavior, and the belief underlying school practice. Staff strives to "reach for the stars" as well. Based on Danielson’s Framework and Measures of Teacher’s Performance results from 2017-2018, teachers were rated either “Highly Effective” or “Effective.” 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student population includes students with Autism, Emotionally Handicapped, Learning Disabled, Intellectually Disabled, Other Health Impaired, Speech and Language Impaired and Pervasive Developmentally Disabled (12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1, and PK 12:1:2 and 8:1:2). The student body includes 14.36% English as a New Language (ENL). ENL students receive Stand Alone and Integrated Instruction. Every student has an IEP which describes the specially-designed instruction and accommodations for individual students that will be used to create access to grade level standards and enable progress toward annual goals. All students are working toward grade level standards. P4Q standardized student population consists of: K-2nd grade = 46 students; 3rd-5th grade = 68 students; or 27.4% of the students across several sites. The alternate assessment population consists of: Pre-K = 28 students; K-2 grade = 105 students; 3rd-5th grade = 89 students; 6th-8th grade =79 students or 72.5% of the students across several sites. P4Q has always focused on the child as an individual, behaviorally and emotionally. There is a team approach to working with all the children – from administration, to CITs/coordinators, teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers. With behavior plans, token economies, consistent language and a point system (Steps to Success) firmly embedded in our program, teaching can occur. Students learn best when they feel safe and understood. Education builds upon prior knowledge, experiences and skills. The school community has developed a clear path to enhance student learning and foster progress. There are a variety of benchmark assessments that allow staff to track progress for both standard assessment and alternate assessment students. A clear picture of the students' present level of performance and deficiencies aid teachers in developing SMART goals and action plans and next steps. Social emotional needs are monitored, data is collected and plans are developed to target a student's most disruptive behaviors (FBAs and BIPs). There is an interdisciplinary approach to instruction with staff collaboration between classroom teachers and coverage teachers. CCLS district rubric afford consistency and continuity as students transition from grade to grade and site to site. Improving students' communication skills, whether verbal or non-verbal, has always been a priority. The use of assistive technology and communication boards give our non-verbal students a voice. All students who are verbal are encouraged to expand their thinking by asking them to make a statement or voice an opinion and provide evidence about the story read. Best practices for building student portfolios throughout the year, for students who are standard assessment, include analyzing different types of assessments which document student growth. Students’ performance data from computer based ELA/Math assessments and running records, drive classroom instruction, identify individualized goals in reading, writing and vocabulary development as well as goals for student Individualized Education Plans. Students receive customized support which enables them greater access to the curriculum. Teachers review and adapt the instructional components of “Ready Gen” in ELA, FOSS in science, Passport to Social Studies, and the interactive math program of “Go Math,” ensuring that teachers are accessing content at the student’s appropriate level of both depth and rigor. Passport to Social Studies was expanded in 2017 -2018 and will continue in 2018-2019. FOSS was adapted for both standard and alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" was purchased in 2017-2018 and will continue in 2018-2019. These programs are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Assessments are from CCLS aligned curriculum and state/city mandated exams (i.e. NYC Performance Tasks, Scantron Performance Series, NYS tests in ELA, Math & Science, NYSELAT). Teachers challenge all 2018-19 CEP 12  students through Depth of Knowledge (DOK) questioning and classroom discussions. AIS is provided to students who scored a Level One on the NYS exams or datafolios in grades 3 - 8 and those in danger of being held over in Grade 2. Instructional strategies with children with Autism include creating a well-organized environment through physical structure, visual schedules and supports, establishing routines and strategies for teaching communication, independence and social skills. A more in depth focus was given to Augmentative Communication devices during 2017-2018, an area which will continue into 2018-2019 through professional development. Teachers of alternate assessment students utilize Unique and Attainment (ELA/Science/SS), Equals (Math), FOSS for Science, Passport to Social Studies and Great Leaps. These programs are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Assessments are from CCLS aligned curriculum and state/city mandated exams (i.e. EQUALS & UNIQUE benchmarks and unit assessments, ABA data, CCLS aligned rubric, SANDI / FAST, NYS Datafolios in ELA, Math, & Science). Scaffolding instruction is practiced in all subjects. Lessons are aligned with pacing guides; reading, writing, listening and speaking activities are incorporated into lessons. Key vocabulary is emphasized throughout the lesson and the teacher provides oral and written preview and review. The teacher and paraprofessionals provide clarification and positive reinforcement. Our teachers devote adequate time to teaching content objectives and language objectives with the focus of building language-related skills and competencies that students need in order to comprehend the content. Students are exposed to the language of Math and Science before the teacher uses the Inquiry Approach to Science — this is especially helpful to our English learners. Students with autism will learn these words through the use of icons with large pictures and a small word, icons with a small picture and large words, or just the printed word with the definition written out. These words are taught/re-taught and maintained using Applied Behavior Analysis techniques. Administrative expectations, all students can learn- "Reach for the Stars", are discussed at faculty meetings, collaborative meetings, and during pre & post observation conferences, professional development, and cabinet. The goal is always for the best of the best. High expectations for all - students and staff alike. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Supportive Environment Our focus on student communication skills, across all grades and classifications, is meant to support the social and emotional growth of students by teaching them the skills necessary to not only better express their needs and wants but, to actively engage with other students in order to create a more collaborative classroom. The SANDI communication data gathered by classroom and cluster teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers shows that students who are alternately assessed increased their scores by over 27%, on average. CCLS aligned rubrics measuring standard students' speaking and listening skills show an increase of more than 35% on average. Collaborative Teachers During the extended professional development Mondays, in addition to the use of "Rethink" web-based group work, we continued weekly pupil personnel meetings in which groups of teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers collaborated to discuss successes and strategies to help individual students thrive. These meetings were designed to give teachers and paraprofessionals in the same grade bands an opportunity to analyze student work, brainstorm solutions for problem behaviors, and grow from each others achievements and challenges. As a result, 66 2018-19 CEP 13  of our students (as opposed to 45 during 2016-2017), approximately 15% of total enrollment are going to less restrictive environments in the fall of 2017. Additionally, there were 140 terminations or reductions in varied related services required for our students. During 2017-2018, 55 children have moved to less restrictive environments. School Leadership This year, the school administration continued with the Social Studies Committee's focus on adapting the city-wide CCLS-aligned social studies curriculum to meet the needs of our students, both standard and alternate. Teachers from various sites met and collaboratively developed 4 units of study for Kindergarten, 4 units of study for 2nd grade, 4 units of study for grades 3-5 and 4 units of study for grade 6. The completed units have been rolled out and are being used in classrooms throughout the school. For 2017-2018, a Social Studies teacher line was created at P4@179 site to assist the K-2 classes. The committee will continue analyzing feedback from classroom teachers while adapting the remaining units. Focus for This Year One key area of focus for this school year will be continuing communication growth, with an emphasis on developing each student's individual and most appropriate mode of communication in order to more actively participate in class discussions and support student success. Additionally, our second area of focus is on parent engagement and providing families and community members with varied opportunities to become meaningfully incorporated into school activities. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q004 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 395 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 10 School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 73.2% % Reduced Lunch 13.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.8% 32.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 90.4% 1.3% 99.5% 26.1% 24.3% 5.1% 8 1% 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● NYSAA for Alternate Assessment students is conducted annually; scores are discussed when released by the state. During the 2015 - 2016 NYSAA, P4Q had 153 students participating. 153 students were assessed in the subject of ELA and Math. Scores in ELA were: 1’s = 8 students, 2’s = 11 students, 3’s = 115 students, and 4’s = 19 students. Scores in Math were: 1’s = 12 students, 2’s = 32 students, 3’s = 89 students, and 4’s = 20 students. In Science (4th and 8th graders only) 104 students were assessed. Scores in Science were: 1’s = 0 students, 2’s = 6 students, 3’s = 20 students, and 4’s = 1 student. For 2016-2017, scores in ELA were: 1’s =3 students, 2’s = 11 students, 3’s = 124 students, and 4’s = 25 students. Scores in Math were: 1’s = 13 students, 2’s = 30 students, 3’s = 106 students, and 4’s = 20 students. In Science (4th and 8th graders only) scores were: 1’s = 0 students, 2’s = 2 students, 3’s = 27 students, and 4’s = 2 students. Scores are not yet available for 2017-2018. ● In keeping with the focus of the Capacity Framework – using instruction which focuses on improving student achievement, P4Q strives for rigor in teaching. Administration and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards to enable students to meet State Standards and Assessment in compliance with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). Pacing calendars, curriculum maps, and lesson plans, modified to meet students' multiple entry points and the necessary style of teaching, including ELLs, are modified accordingly with immediate feedback and next steps, resulting in coherence across grades and subject areas and promotes college and career readiness for all students. By using the same curriculum and following CCLS, common language is used among both the staff and students. The questions asked encourage higher order skills using Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DOK) Levels. Teachers intentionally design, deliver and scaffold guided instructional practices informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. Paraprofessionals are strategically used to encourage students toward deeper understanding of the material and are part of the “teacher team.” They are included in lesson planning and IEP development. Students' goals, behavioral (social/emotional) and academic, are known to staff and students, as appropriate. Information is gathered by interpreting data from a variety of common assessments to plan lessons and group students appropriately.  For the past 3 years, staff has been collecting and analyzing SANDI data to focus on and show improvements in communication skills. Students have made reliable progress over each year. Previous CEP goals have looked for 10% growth in these skills and students have consistently showed almost 30% growth in each of the three years.  According to SANDI and FAST assessments in 2017-18, 160 alternate assessment students at P4Q are on Level 1 in FAST, 103 in Level 2, and 13 in Level 3. For the Level 1 students, the average proficiency for the 7 RI.1 Standards-aligned skills was 68%. For the Level 2 students, the average proficiency for the 7 RI.1 Standards-2018-19 CEP 16   aligned skills was 35%. For the Level 3 students, the average proficiency for the 7 RI.1 Standards-aligned skills was 4%. SANDI Performance Items by Level (PIL) charts are available yet underused at this time by P4Q Alternate instructional staff. These charts assist with identifying academic groupings for students based on standards-aligned skill mastery.  The use of resources (e.g. budget, technology, space, time) is aligned with the Instructional Goals as evidenced in meaningful work projects. Using CCLS curriculum materials across sites has continued, including ReadyGen – K-5, and GoMath- K-5 for Math for standardized students. Unique, Attainment, Equals, etc. is used for a Common Teaching Framework with specific skills being taught over time for the Alternate Assessment students. Great Leaps, a phonics based program was implemented during the 2017-2018 school year for alternate assessment students and students in standardized classes in need of decoding and fluency remediation. This program will continue to be utilized on an as-needed basis for the 2018-2019 school year. IEP goals are created from assessments which drive future instruction (and discrete trials programs for alternate assessment students). Leveled libraries are in all classrooms and small group instruction is evident at each site and in each classroom. ● Data from assessments is used to inform instruction and assist with identifying student achievement using the appropriate District created rubric level. These rubrics (A, B, C, or D) are used to further coherent language and consistency. Grade specific, school created rubrics and unit assessments results are discussed and include "next steps" to make instruction meaningful to students during common planning periods. The school uses common assessments to create a clear picture of each student's steps towards meeting their IEP goals. Instruction is adjusted so all students, including ELL's, demonstrate an increase in mastery. ● English as a New Language (ENL) teachers use “Language Arts Progression” a.k.a English as a Second Language Learning Standards. The new Language Arts Progression is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards: Speaking and Listening Standard 1- Comprehension and Collaboration (Students will prepare for and participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with diverse partners building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly and persuasively) and CCLS Language Standard 6 – Vocabulary and Acquisition Use (Students will acquire and use accurately a range of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases sufficient for reading, writing and expression); as well as, to the NYS Arts Standard 1 (Creating and Performing in the Arts) and Standard 4 (Understanding the Cultural Dimensions and Cultural Contribution of the Arts). ● Information is gathered by interpreting data from a variety of assessments to plan lessons and group students appropriately. The use of common planning periods is structured for teachers to meet regularly, with the School Instructional Team and with one another. This allows teachers the opportunity to align their professional goals with the school's instructional goals. The focus is always on improving teacher instruction, resulting in improving student mastery in R1.1 for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a school-wide increase in the K-8 alternate assessment students demonstrating an increase of 10% in reading aligned skills (R1.1) as measured by SANDI assessments. Data will be recorded by the classroom teacher. (Rigorous Instruction) 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). K-8 Alternate assessment teachers will use SANDI assessment data to identify FAST LEVELS and group students according to PIL Chart for reading aligned skills - RI.1. during baseline and benchmark data periods. Teachers will analyze school-wide deficits from the SANDI Standards Report in order to target a 10% increase in reading aligned skills to CCLS reading standard RI.1. K-8 Alternate assessment teachers will create appropriate evidence based instructional lessons/programs using Attainment curriculum (6-8); Unique (K-5); ReadyGen (for students capable of working with higher materials) and interventions in addition to using SANDI materials to target 7 key skills identified per PIL Chart depending on student Level (1-3) Professional Development will continue at collaborative team meetings, District workshops, and through turn-keying to all staff during extended day Mondays. New Teachers will work with mentors and seasoned teachers to ensure understanding of SANDI/FAST, PIL Charts, groupings, and student progress.The School Instructional Team will meet monthly to compile and analyze classroom data, helping to ensure consistent next steps. The School Development Committee will ensure that appropriate professional development is planned to support the SIT’s recommendations, based upon results of assessments. K-8 Alternate Assessment teachers September 2018, March 2019 Classroom staff, administrators and SIT Team K-8 Alternate Assessment teachers September 2018-June 2019 Classroom staff and computer cluster teacher(s), ENL teachers K-8 Alternate Assessment teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, ENL teachers Effective and Developing rated teachers September 2018 through June 2019 (weekly and monthly) Classroom teachers, Cluster teachers, SIT Team, SDC Committee, Administration Administration Observations will be conducted by administration based on teacher overall HEDI scores. Effective and Developing rated teachers will have a specific amount (per Danielson's Framework) of scheduled intervisitations with Highly Effective teachers. Effective and Developing rated teachers will meet with Administration to discuss September 2018 - June 2019 (based on HEDI 2018-19 CEP 18 intervisitation highlighting the techniques and strategies that can be brought into the classroom. The administration will ensure teacher understanding, implementation (observed through informal/formal observations using Danielson’s Framework), continuity and progress. Lesson plans are modified to meet children's' multiple entry points and teaching is modified on the spot for immediate feedback. Staff members engage in parent outreach and discuss student deficits and next steps with parents/guardians. Outreach occurs through phone calls, student home notes/communication books, parent teacher conferences, parent workshops and IEP meetings. Classroom and cluster teachers, related service providers, ENL teachers score/Danielson Frameworks) Sept 2018- June 2019 (ongoing) Classroom teachers and/or Cluster teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Activities Timeline Key Personnel School will host parent "Meet and Greet" serving as an opportunity to introduce parents to curricular expectations for literacy, including school-wide goal of improving reading for information. September 2018 Provide weekly opportunities for families to work one-on-one with teachers and school staff on how best to support students in alternately assessed classes with skill acquisition and performance. Monthly (beginning September 2018) Students will "lead" parents and families around classroom and bulletin displays to explain (using preferred mode of communication) their work. Weekly; Extended Tuesdays (SBO-vote) School will host "Learning Fair" to showcase class activities and programs to parents and families. September 2018/ May 2019 Teachers will write in communication notebook and include comments on daily progress to parents. Daily School administrators   Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers  Related service providers  Classroom teachers  Parent coordinator  Related service providers (where appropriate) Students   Classroom teachers  Paraprofessionals School administrators   Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers  Cluster teachers  Related service providers (where appropriate)  Classroom teachers, Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy monies will continue to be used to purchase core curriculum materials for the standard assessment students and Equals, Unique and Attainment for 6:1:1, K-8 alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" phonics was purchased for 2017-2018 for the majority of alternate assessment classes and is continuing to be utilized throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The NYC Social Studies curriculum including trade books, which offers a sequence of instruction that can be adapted and customized to meet the students’ individual needs, will continue through 2018-2019 school year. New for the 2018-2019 school year, P4Q is sending two teachers (K-2nd grade teacher; 3-5th grade teacher)and one administrator for training in the new Amplify Science curriculum which will then be turn-keyed to all staff. Staff involved in P4Q’s professional development will include technology, cluster teachers, coordinators, mentors and classroom teachers. Professional development will be offered through the district and in-house on the extended days. Food Services provide breakfast and lunch to all students, enabling them to focus and learn. Common preparatory and teaching periods are scheduled to give the opportunity for teachers to meet. Per session and per diem money is used to provide substitutes for professional development and CFI per session. Title III money will incorporate families of English Language Learners with cultural activities. Project Arts money is used to implement end year celebrations, trips, and materials to be used throughout the year following the Blueprint for the Arts. Theater strategies will be continued, since they are designed to increase special education students’ communication, socialization and academic skills through integrated, arts-based approaches. ”Material for the Arts” supplements art supplies. PTA/SLT has donated their time and food items to support events at the school such as Carnival and other celebrations. SLT dollars are allocated in Galaxy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase school-wide in the K-8 alternate assessment students in reading aligned skills (RI.1) as measured by SANDI assessments. Baseline data will be collected in October, mid-year Benchmark data will occur in February, and final analysis will occur in May. with data recorded by the classroom teacher . Progress monitoring will be conducted each month during extended Mondays and Tuesdays (based on SBO-vote) by the teacher teams. Teams will analyze student work for successes and challenges and monitor progress against the SANDI rubric. As a result of the SBO vote, following the Chancellor’s recommended extended Monday and Tuesday school day for staff, teachers, paraprofessionals and related service personnel will participate in grade level meetings and weekly collaborative team meetings to discuss teaching strategies, use of rubrics and comparison of assessment results. Clear deadlines for assessment completion enables staff to determine effectiveness of lessons and student understanding of topics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI rubrics using accuracy and prompt level to show student progress will be used. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Children need to know how to express themselves verbally, convey thoughts and feelings, actively listen, agree or disagree, and convey clear verbal and non-verbal messages. In order for students to prepare for and participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with diverse partners, build on others’ ideas and express their own views clearly and persuasively (CCLS Speaking and Listening Standard 1, Anchor Standard 1), students must feel safe and confident in their communication skills.  For alternate assessment students, who make up approximately 68% of our population, functional communication is an essential tool for acquiring their needs and expressing wants which allows them to feel safe in their environment. Our priority need or focus is to empower communication for students, especially those with communication and/or emotional difficulties (ESSA).  Trends found throughout the past several school years show students' communication skills have improved when encouraged to express themselves and when given appropriate outlets to discuss their needs and wants. Although there have been improvements, student communication skills are still found as a weakness which needs to be addressed.  The School Instructional Team analyzed data from the 2015-16 Learning Environment Survey and discovered that only 56% of staff felt that the school creates a culture that encourages students to support one another through communicating - thus concluding this was a major weakness. In the 2016-2017 survey, only 76% of students agreed or strongly agreed that most students at their school treat each other with respect. Additionally, in the social/emotional (the lowest scoring area) section of supportive environment, 81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students how to advocate for themselves. This was one of the lowest scores on the survey in this area. These scores show a need for continued work on trust, creating a respectful learning environment, and promoting social/emotional growth. The 2017-2018 School Survey shows that this area continues to be weakest in the Supportive Environment category. Additionally, 84% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Although 84% is high, it is one of the lower scores in this category.  During the 2017-18 school year, a streamlined behavior management system using the Token Economy and the Power of Choice Program, was further implemented at the main building, P179Q.. Students have the opportunity to earn daily (recess, tangible reinforcers), weekly (clubs), and quarterly (levels trips, school store) rewards for exhibiting appropriate behavior and completing assigned tasks. Students met with teachers to set "point goals" that needed to be attained to attend weekly clubs. This proved to be highly motivating for students as they no longer felt that their rewards were out of reach or too far away to be motivating. In analyzing the data of which students earned rewards, staff noticed that many of the same students were not earning clubs and levels trips. During common planning periods and extended Mondays and Tuesdays, staff met both formally and informally to analyze student behavior and to determine next steps for students who were not achieving their behavioral goals. In their discussions, they found that most of these students had difficulty expressing themselves when feeling angry or frustrated. They thought that conferencing about 2018-19 CEP 22  behavior, much like the writing conferences that are part of the writing process during ELA blocks, would benefit not only those students having the most difficulty but also those that are showing improvements. Additionally, they thought that students having facilitated discussions about behavior amongst themselves during counseling sessions and during class time, would not only promote positive behavioral growth and create a more supportive environment, but would also increase speaking and listening skills. More students with emotional issues are requesting to speak with their guidance counselors when in crisis, indicating that students are being proactive instead of reactive when dealing with a difficult situation. In 2018-19, in addition to the current student group already participating, we will also roll out this short, medium, and long-term rewards system to an additional off-site with students with emotional disturbances and create a more in-depth analysis of the students who are not regularly earning these rewards in order to see what motivates them and how to develop their social skills and their speaking and listening skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessment classes will increase social and emotional growth of students, via conversations led by teacher/counselor and between students about behavior, as measured by a 5% increase in weekly point averages, as compared to the previous school year. (Supportive Environment) 2018-19 CEP 23 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using a team approach, staff members working with a student including classroom teacher, paraprofessional, cluster teacher(s) and related service providers, will analyze behavioral data monthly from daily points sheets, incident anecdotal reports, and Clubs records, to formulate discussion topics to promote social-emotional growth. On extended Monday PD’s and during team meetings, staff will participate in webinars focusing on behavior modification and analyze and discuss student progress and generalization of social-emotional skills. K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessments students K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessments students September 2018- May 2019 Classroom Teachers; Cluster Teachers; Related Service Providers; Paraprofessionals. October 2018- June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers; Cluster Teachers; Related Service Providers; Paraprofessionals; ENL Teacher, New teachers. SDI Committee; SIT Committee; Administration Speech Providers, site coordinators, teachers, guidance The School Development Committee will create appropriate professional development that supports the SIT's suggestions, by providing professional development on Monday and Tuesday extended days. Administration will assist by ensuring teacher understanding, implementation through informal/formal observations using Danielson’s Framework for continuity and progress. The SIT will meet monthly to analyze data and help ensure next steps. The School Development Committee will continue to ensure that appropriate professional development is supporting the SIT's suggestions, by providing professional development on Monday and Tuesday extended days. Administration continues to ensure teacher understanding, implementation (observed through informal/formal observations using Danielson’s Framework), continuity and progress. A rewards system comprised of short-term, medium term, and long-term rewards, based on a token economy system and Power of Choice program, will be implemented for students by K-5 Standardized Teachers SIT/SDC committees K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 2018-19 CEP 24 site coordinators, teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators. Administrators will assign professional (admin) periods to one teacher per site to average points, assign students to clubs, and manage the weekly activities. ENL strategies will be incorporated into classroom instruction to ensure adequate progress of students receiving these services. Additionally, ENL students will be analyzed as a sub-group to monitor their progress more closely. counselors, and administrators. September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, one teacher per site September 2018-June 2019 ENL teachers, Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals alternate assessments students K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessments students ENL Students in K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessments students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School Activities School will host parent "Meet and "Greet" serving as an opportunity to introduce parents to learning expectations and Power fo Choice/Token Economy behavior system or communication, including school-wide goal of improving student socio-emotional skills   Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers School administrators Timeline Key Personnel September 2018 Provide workshops and trainings for families to work one-on-one with teachers and school staff on how best to support students with emotional difficulties and delays At least once per school year (beginning in September 2018) Teachers will use extended Tuesday hours from SBO-vote to reach out to parents and families (via email, telephone, in-person appointments, website) to discuss individual student gains and areas of need. Weekly; Extended Tuesdays (SBO-vote) Teachers will write letters home in communication notebooks/daily behavior sheets detailing progress and/or performance to parents. Parent native language will be utilized through translations. Daily  Guidance Counselors  Classroom teachers  Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers  Related service providers  Paraprofessionals  (when appropriate) Students (when appropriate)  Classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy monies will supplement school stores and purchase reinforcers at multiple sites to encourage students to earn behavioral points. "Levels" trips will be scheduled. Tax Levy monies will continue to be used to purchase core curriculum materials for the standard assessment students and Equals, Unique and Attainment for 6:1:1, K-8 alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" phonics was purchased for 2017-2018 for the majority of alternate assessment classes. The NYC Social Studies curriculum including trade books, which offers a sequence of instruction that can be adapted and customized to meet the students’ individual needs, will continue through 2018-2019 school year. New for the 2018-2019 school year, P4Q is sending two teachers (K-2nd grade teacher; 3-5th grade teacher)and one administrator for training in the new Amplify Science curriculum which will then be turnkey over to all staff. Staff involved in P4Q’s professional development will include technology, cluster teachers, coordinators, mentors and classroom teachers. Professional development will be offered through the district and in-house on the extended days. Food Services provide breakfast and lunch to all students, enabling them to focus and learn. Common preparatory and teaching periods are scheduled to give the opportunity for teachers to meet. Per session and per diem money is used to provide substitutes for professional development and CFI per session. Title III money will incorporate families of English Language Learners with cultural activities. Project Arts money is used to implement end year celebrations, trips, and materials to be used throughout the year following the Blueprint for the Arts. Theater strategies will be continued, since they are designed to increase special education students’ communication, socialization and academic skills through integrated, arts-based approaches. ”Material for the Arts” supplements art supplies. PTA/SLT has donated their time and food items to support events at the school such as Carnival and other celebrations. SLT dollars are allocated in Galaxy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers in K-5 standard assessment and 3-5 12:1:1 alternate assessment classes will increase social and emotional growth of students, via conversations led by teacher/counselor and between students about behavior, as measured by a 3% increase in weekly point averages, as compared to the previous school year. Baseline data will be collected in October, mid-year Benchmark data will occur in February, and final analysis will occur in May. This data will be compared to the 2017-2018 data to see current and longitudinal trends. Progress monitoring will be conducted each month using daily behavior sheets, monthly points averages, and Clubs reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily points sheets, Weekly Point Averages, Clubs data sheets, Levels Points Sheets, and collaborative meeting logs will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As an annual practice, the instructional staff of P4Q creates two annual goals for professional growth as part of Danielson's Framework and "Advance." In September of the 2017-18 school year, staff again wrote goals that were connected to their prior year's HEDI scores, reflective of both student achievement and administration observation outcomes. In discussing best practices for our organization, the P4Q Inquiry Team recognized a gap between creating these goals and establishing defined efforts towards their mastery. The team acknowledged that while the goals are created with careful attention to targeted deficits and are written to be SMART, the opportunities for staff to both work towards achieving them and recognize when they were mastered, are lacking. During the discussion, the team brainstormed potential ways to maximize extended Monday staff developments and collaborations in connection with individual teacher professional goals. The 2017-2018 School Survey results show, in the category of Collaborative Teachers, P4's lowest scores were in "teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. (Q1c)" and "teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. (Q1d)" Both categories received about 80% of staff in agreement with the above statements. Focusing on meeting professional goals gives teachers a way to document their improvements and try new ideas to improve instruction and the school at large. For a second year, P4Q engaged in "ReThink" webinars during extended Monday professional development time. The rights were purchased by the school and all teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers viewed the videos and took the assessments. Additionally, teams of teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers now had common strategies and language to discuss what was learned on "ReThink" and how best to use it in the classroom. The combination of learning these new strategies and then discussing how to actually use them proved very effective, especially as the population of the school continues to change and more and more alternate assessment students enter our school. For this upcoming school year, we will continue with webinars and PPT meetings. This year's webinars will be more individualized to the needs of individual staff members and student and will allow teachers to select their desired topics. During the PPT meetings, staff discussed effective teaching strategies to bring students to the next level. PPTs continued striving for higher goal setting with more rigor, in behavioral and academic expectations, with a focus on improved communication (as it related to the prior year Collaboration goal). Discussion of the student(s) also involved the prior year's teacher and therapists to help with the development of the whole child. Student assessments allowed teachers to identify patterns of student's strengths and weaknesses and determine next steps. Moving forward, the SIT identified this establish practice as a key opportunity for instructional staff to make strides towards, and ultimately achieving, their annual professional goals. 2018-19 CEP 28  Key factors needed:  The SIT, with 12 staff members from all sites, meet monthly and focus on analyzing genuine student work, turn-keying information to staff, and ensuring that CEP goals can be met. The team often works in smaller groups – standard staff with standard staff, alternate with alternate, early childhood with early childhood, etc. and then come together to share information.  The School Development Committee (SDC) meets a minimum of 2x/month and email each other at the sites, sharing ideas, topics and a monthly calendar. Once the information has been agreed upon, a final document is sent to the principal to disseminate to the staff and other administrators. Their goal is to develop and carry out professional development workshops and create a structure of supports for all staff to benefit the outcomes for students.  The SIT collaborates with the SDC on development of professional development topics. Together, both teams work on analyzing genuine student work, rubric scores, and discussing next steps needed to increase student learning. With all grades represented and both standard and alternate assessment staff involved, grade level collaborations focus on analyzing student work and correlating lesson plans. The goals for both committees are to provide meaningful PD opportunities for all staff (paraprofessionals, related service providers, teachers, and administrators). By increasing building capacity, P4Q will generate better outcomes for students. Staff facilitate their own PD's on extended Mondays and Tuesdays based upon the SDC calendar of topics and their professional goals.   Out-of-building/District provided PDs are assigned and/or requested to improve best practices for instruction.  Teachers can request to participate in D75 or DOE PD’s listed on websites. Teachers are assigned based on strengths and experience with varied populations of students guided by the preference sheets. In accordance with the Capacity Framework regarding “Collaborative Teachers”, we believe that high quality professional development is essential for successful implementation of modified CCLS for teachers working with both standard and alternate assessment students. Administrators and paraprofessionals are also included in this goal, as noted in our Quality Review findings of “Well-Developed” for Indicator 1.2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will increase their collaboration by 10% with varied stakeholders to incorporate the planning for Specially Designed Instruction with a focus on inter-departmentalized and cross curriculum areas as evidenced by monthly collaborative team logs . 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional staff will collaborate during Extended Day Mondays and Tuesdays to review curriculum across the content areas, paying special attention to sequence of common themes and topics, in order to facilitate specially designed instruction. Instructional staff will be provided with learning opportunities on extended Mondays and through in-house and district professional developments to enhance their understanding of Specially Designed Instruction, specifically how to meet the needs of their current students. Through formal and informal observations, administrators and unit coordinators will determine needs of teaching staff (HEDI scores and MOTP from Advance) and will match them with options for inter-class visitations and learning walks in order to ensure best practices are being disseminated throughout the organization. After each walk-through/visitation, teachers will reconvene to discuss what they learned and how to implement in their classroom using the Peer to Peer Inter visitation form. Observations will be conducted by administration based on teacher's overall HEDI scores and their MOTP choices. Effective and Developing rated teachers will choose their number (per Danielson's Framework) of scheduled inter-visitations with Highly Effective teachers. Effective and Developing rated teachers will meet with Administration to discuss inter-visitations highlighting the techniques and strategies that can be brought into the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-8 Standard and Alternate teachers, cluster teachers, speech therapists, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals K-8 Standard and Alternate teachers, cluster teachers, speech therapists, paraprofessionals K-8 Standard and Alternate teachers, cluster teachers, speech therapists, paraprofessionals Effective and Developing rated teachers Sept 2018 Administrators, K-8 Standard and Alternate class and cluster teachers, ENL teachers, speech therapists, paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 October 2018 -June 2019 K-8 Standard and Alternate teachers, cluster teachers, speech therapists, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals Administration, Classroom teachers, coordinators, lead teachers, classroom and cluster teachers Administration, Classroom teachers, cluster teachers September 2018 through June 2019 (based on rating of Danielson's Framework) 2018-19 CEP 30  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Activities School will host parent "Meet and Greet" serving as an opportunity to introduce parents to learning expectations, including targeted areas gleaned from prior year student achievement data. Timeline Key Personnel School administrators  September 2018  Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers Provide workshops and trainings for families to work one-on-one with teachers and school staff on how best to support students in standard and alternate classrooms based on identified need areas and strategies for growth. Monthly (beginning in September 2018) School will host "Learning Fair" to showcase class activities and learning benchmarks to parents and families. September 2018/ May 2019 Teachers will write letters home in communication notebooks (alternate students)and on Daily Home Notes and on point sheets (standard students) detailing students' behavioral and academic progress and/or performance to parents. Parents' native language will be addressed. Daily Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Speech Therapists   Alternate classroom teachers  Parent coordinator  School administrators  Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers  Cluster teachers  Related service providers (when appropriate)  Classroom teachers  Cluster teachers  Related service providers Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy monies will continue to be used to purchase core curriculum materials for the standard assessment students and Equals, Unique and Attainment for 6:1:1, K-8 alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" phonics was purchased for 2017-2018 for the majority of alternate assessment classes and is continuing to be utilized throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The NYC Social Studies curriculum including trade books, which offers a sequence of instruction that can be adapted and customized to meet the students’ individual needs, will continue through 2018-2019 school year. New for the 2018-2019 school year, P4Q is sending two teachers (K-2nd grade teacher; 3-5th grade teacher)and one administrator for training in the new Amplify Science curriculum which will then be turn-keyed over to all staff. Staff involved in P4Q’s professional development will include technology, cluster teachers, coordinators, mentors and classroom teachers. Professional development will be offered through the district and in-house on the extended days. Food Services provide breakfast and lunch to all students, enabling them to focus and learn. Common preparatory and teaching periods are scheduled to give the opportunity for teachers to meet. Per session and per diem money is used to provide substitutes for professional development and CFI per session. Title III money will incorporate families of English Language Learners with cultural activities. Project Arts money is used to implement end year celebrations, trips, and materials to be used throughout the year following the Blueprint for the Arts. Theater strategies will be continued, since they are designed to increase special education students’ communication, socialization and academic skills through integrated, arts-based approaches. ”Material for the Arts” supplements art supplies. PTA/SLT 2018-19 CEP 31  has donated their time and food items to support events at the school such as Carnival and other celebrations. SLT dollars are allocated in Galaxy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have demonstrated a 5% increase from baseline in their collaboration as evidenced by collaborative team logs. Data will be collected using a data collection tool in October, mid-year Benchmark data will occur in February, and Final analysis will occur in May. Mid-point benchmark in February will be measured by evidence of teacher collaboration logs. The data collection tool will look for documented evidence from teachers showing efforts made towards collaboration on specially designed instruction in all content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collection tracking tool used monthly. This tool reflects various efforts taken towards achieving professional learning goal(s) and monitors teachers self-evaluation of progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administration continues to support school staff and teachers through supervising instruction across all sites. Informal and formal observations through Advance using the Danielson's Framework are conducted throughout the year. The amount of observations completed are based on the Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) observation option selection form completed every September by the teachers. This form is handed to administration who then enter the teacher's choice in Advance thus generating the amount of observation. Observation options are based on the teacher's overall rating from the prior school year. To support teacher's overall annual professional performance review rating which is based on the sum of two sub-component scores: Measure of Teacher Practice and Measures of Student Learning administration will create a schedule of inter-visitations between Effective and Highly Effective teachers and between Team Teachers. Prior to creating the schedule, administration will analyze the Advance data and teacher's next steps from prior year. Patterns and trends from past observations will facilitate the inter-visitation schedule linking teacher teams accordingly. Administration will conduct pre and post observation meetings with teachers to discuss feedback and next steps. Administration will review inter-visitation logs with teachers during post observation meetings. Discussion of teacher professional goals will be included in pre and post observation meetings to continue supporting teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will increase the number of opportunities for teacher inter-visitations by 10% from baseline by identifying areas of need during informal or formal observations using Danielson's Framework as evidence by the completion of peer to peer inter-visitation forms. Progress will be monitored every 3 months. (Effective School Leadership) 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration will supervise instruction/building capacity across sites by conducting observations throughout multiple sites. Administration will analyze Advance data from informal and formal observations and next steps during pre and post observation meetings with teachers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, administration Sept. 2018 Administration and Teachers To June 2019 Teachers, administration Sept. 2018 Administration and Teachers To June 2019 Nov. 2018 To June 2019 Administration and Teachers Administration will review prior year's teacher MOTL/MOSL scores and analyzing patterns of teaching to facilitate a schedule of inter-visitations for Effective rated students with Highly Effective teachers Teachers, administration Administration will discuss and provide meaningful staff next steps/feedback during post observation meetings to calibrate observation findings and inter-visitation logs. Teachers, administration Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers Administration will collaborate and discuss their findings (patterns and trends) for areas of strength and needs for improvement resulting from staff observations and referencing Advance website. Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Activities School will host parent "Meet and Greet" and Parent Teacher Conferences throughout the year giving parents an opportunity to meet with Administration September, November, March, May 2019 Key Personnel Timeline  School administrators 2018-19 CEP 34  School Leadership Team is aware of the professional and collegiality of staff focusing on improving themselves Monthly meetings (beginning in September 2018)  Parent coordinator  Classroom teachers  Administration  Parents  Teachers  UFT rep. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy monies will continue to be used to purchase core curriculum materials for the standard assessment students and Equals, Unique and Attainment for 6:1:1, K-8 alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" phonics was purchased for 2017-2018 for the majority of alternate assessment classes and is continuing to be utilized throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The NYC Social Studies curriculum including trade books, which offers a sequence of instruction that can be adapted and customized to meet the students’ individual needs, will continue through 2018-2019 school year. New for the 2018-2019 school year, P4Q is sending two teachers (K-2nd grade teacher; 3-5th grade teacher)and one administrator for training in the new Amplify Science curriculum which will then be turn-keyed over to all staff. Staff involved in P4Q’s professional development will include technology, cluster teachers, coordinators, mentors and classroom teachers. Professional development will be offered through the district and in-house on the extended days. Food Services provide breakfast and lunch to all students, enabling them to focus and learn. Common preparatory and teaching periods are scheduled to give the opportunity for teachers to meet. Per session and per diem money is used to provide substitutes for professional development and CFI per session. Title III money will incorporate families of English Language Learners with cultural activities. Project Arts money is used to implement end year celebrations, trips, and materials to be used throughout the year following the Blueprint for the Arts. Theater strategies will be continued, since they are designed to increase special education students’ communication, socialization and academic skills through integrated, arts-based approaches. ”Material for the Arts” supplements art supplies. PTA/SLT has donated their time and food items to support events at the school such as Carnival and other celebrations. SLT dollars are allocated in Galaxy. RESO A will continue to be requested to upgrade hardware at all sites and include on site training for technology use. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 35  Baseline data will be the teacher's overall HEDI score from the prior year and handed out to staff. Midyear data will be collected through Advance Teacher Level Completion Report. During administration cabinet meetings, admin will analyze to see which teachers are performing under development and effective in the Danielson's framework domains throughout the year. Inter-visitation schedules will be adjusted according to observations throughout the year. End of the year data will be collected from Advance and distributed to teachers by administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observations will be entered into Advance. Reviewing of teacher Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There are issues or barriers which challenge our organization’s continued success. While there has been an increase in parent participation during annual reviews and triennials, there is still a low number of parents coming into our buildings. A low percentage of Learning Environment Surveys from 2017-18 were returned by the parents (with only 57% responding - a decrease from 83% in 2016-17). Many of the parents claim to have lost their surveys and/or their access code. The school personnel continue outreach and our parent coordinator and site coordinators have planned monthly trainings/workshops and events to increase positive interaction between school and home. Additionally, with our sites all across Queens, parents find it difficult to attend meetings due to transportation and/or child care issues. To bridge the gap and keep parents informed, a parent newsletter is distributed three or four time per year. During 2017-18, parents continued using technology such as email, MyStudentNYC (NYC Schools Account), and text message blasts from SchoolMessenger. It is critical that we increase both the number of opportunities and the number of parents positively engaged with the school. Parent attendance rates for school events like Project Arts shows, Paint Night, the Spring Dance, and Monthly Parent Trainings brought 522 parents and families into our school. While this is a slight increase from the prior year (452), it is clear that the same parent groups are repeatedly attending and that we are consistently not connecting with others. P4Q's website has been significantly developed in the past school year, yet parent and staff use are low. This is potentially due to a lack of knowledge about the types of information available on the website, lack of current information on the site, and general lack of routine behaviors associated with using this particular website. In keeping with the focus of the Capacity Framework, engaging families, having high expectations for staff and students, and showcasing best practices and can all be accomplished with increased staff and parent use of a school website. Learning Environment School survey results from 2016-17 indicate that 98% of the parents who completed the survey agree or strongly agree that staff regularly communicate with parents/guardians about how to help students learn. This is an area of strength. According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 99% of families say they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school and the same percentage say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. All students diagnosed with autism have an IEP Mandate under "Recommended Special Education Programs/Services" stating "60 minutes Parent Counseling and Training Monthly" to promote parent involvement in their child's education. Monthly flyers are sent home from the PTA and/or agencies providing families with these workshops. Parents have the opportunity to choose P4Q sites which are most convenient for them. With the SBO vote to continue extended Mondays and Tuesdays, 2 additional Parent-Teacher conferences were held. In accordance with City-Wide Expectations for Parent Involvement the school will focus on welcoming and encouraging family participation, building and developing stronger partnerships with the community. Parent Teacher Conference attendance is taken during the four parent teacher school nights throughout the year (September, November, March and May). Teachers communicate to parents in student communication notebook about PTC dates 2018-19 CEP 37  and reminders are sent home. Data on the number of parents attending meetings is collected. Translations and/or translators are available at each workshop and meeting. We have also formed relationships with City Council members in many of our sites; neighborhoods - encouraging parents to meet the people who represent them. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school website will be updated once per month with information from stakeholders (grade bands, cluster departments, related services, PTA) about class, site, school, and community events and activities in order to disseminate information to parents and community members, as measured by monthly outreach logs documenting website submissions. (Family and Community Ties) 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, Parent Coordinator, SIT team, SDC members, webmaster, and lead teacher will lead professional developments for parents, students, and staff on how to navigate the website and gather ideas for submissions. Parents, Teachers, Staff, Students Sept 2018 -June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Staff, Administration, PTA and SLT members Administrators will provide the Webmaster with professional (administrative periods) to facilitate the design, organization, and uploading of documents to the website and ensure information is timely. Parents, Teachers, Staff, Students Monthly Parent Trainings held at individual sites or collaboratively at the main site 179 (speech, OT, PT, IEP, behavioral interventions). Outside agencies will be brought in to share information and support. Trainings and agencies information will be update on website. Parents, Teachers, Staff, Students Teachers in grade bands (K-2 Standard, K-2 Alternate, 3-5 Standard, 3-5 Alternate, 6-8 Alternate), Cluster Departments, Related Service departments, and PTA will hand in photos and/or written explanations of activities/events to webmaster on monthly basis. Parents, Teachers, Staff, Students Teachers/Related Service providers will document website submissions on Monthly Parent Outreach Logs and SIT team will collect logs to determine participation and next steps for New teachers will work with mentors and other school personnel to ensure understanding of: communication books, Power of Choice point sheets, what data to have at parent meetings, school-wide grading policy, IEP writing, instructional best practices and next steps so appropriate information is submitted for publication Parents, Teachers, Staff, Students Mentors, New teachers, parents Sept 2018 -June 2019 Administrators and Webmaster Sept 2018 -June 2019 Sept 2018 -June 2019 Sept 2018 -June 2019 Sept 2018 -June 2019 Webmaster, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Related Service providers, Agencies Parent Coordinator, All staff, PTA, SLT, Webmaster and administrators All Teachers, related service providers and administration, SIT team members Administration, Mentors, New Teachers, IEP coordinator, Site Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy monies will continue to be used to purchase core curriculum materials for the standard assessment students and Equals, Unique and Attainment for 6:1:1, K-8 alternate assessment classes. "Great Leaps" phonics was purchased for 2017-2018 for the majority of alternate assessment classes and will continue. The NYC Social Studies curriculum including trade books, which offers a sequence of instruction that can be adapted and customized to meet the students’ individual needs, will continue through 2018-2019 school year. New for the 2018-2019 school year, P4Q is sending two teachers (K-2nd grade teacher; 3-5th grade teacher)and one administrator for training in the new Amplify Science curriculum which will then be turn-keyed over to all staff. Staff involved in P4Q’s professional development will include technology, cluster teachers, coordinators, mentors and classroom teachers. Professional development will be offered through the district and in-house on the extended days. Food Services provide breakfast and lunch to all students, enabling them to focus and learn. Common preparatory and teaching periods are scheduled to give the opportunity for teachers to meet. Per session and per diem money is used to provide substitutes for professional development and CFI per session. Title III money will incorporate families of English Language Learners with cultural activities. Project Arts money is used to implement end year celebrations, trips, and materials to be used throughout the year following the Blueprint for the Arts. Theater strategies will be continued, since they are designed to increase special education students’ communication, socialization and academic skills through integrated, arts-based approaches. ”Material for the Arts” supplements art supplies. PTA/SLT has donated their time and food items to support events at the school such as Carnival and other celebrations. SLT dollars are allocated in Galaxy. School Messenger will continue to be used and purchased for the parents. Translation services have been purchased as well as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Baseline data will be collected using a parent outreach log in October, mid-year Benchmark data will occur in February, and final analysis will occur in May. By February 2019, the school website will be updated 9 times, once per month, with information from stakeholders (grade bands, cluster departments, related services, PTA) about class, site, school, and community events and activities in order to disseminate information to parents and community members, as measured by monthly outreach logs documenting website submissions. Mid-point benchmark, in February, will be measured by a documented increase of frequency, in which school staff contributes content to the school website compared to baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly data collection tool in the form of a parent outreach log submitted by stakeholders (grade band teachers, cluster departments, related service providers, and PTA). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one tutoring and peer tutoring will be used as appropriate a minimum of one period per week. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention Services will be provided to students during the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teachers, during professional periods, tutored students scoring Level 1 on State and City exams. K-2 students will be assessed using NYCPerformance Tasks and running records. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) An AIS/IEP/Testing school based teacher will be integrated to assist teachers and students alike. On the elementary level, use of Wilson’s Fundations (both used to address decoding, encoding sight word fluency, vocabulary, phonemic awareness and print knowledge), Voyager Passport (addresses reading comprehension, fluency, critical thinking and vocabulary development. Additionally, Strategies to Achieve Reading and Aim Higher Reading Comprehension and Ready – NYS CCLS ELA workbooks will be utilized. Performance Series (assessment test which provides item skills analysis to determine individual skills needed by students) is being used to differentiate 2018-19 CEP 41  Mathematics Teachers, during professional periods, tutored students scoring Level 1 on State and City exams . K-2 students will be assessed through NYC Performance Tasks. tutoring. Smartboards, Ipads and laptop carts were used at all sites. During Chapter 683 2016, 2017 and 2018we incorporated the Chancellor's Summer in the City ELAprogram -LitCamp. LitCampuses a Reader/Writer workshop model, encouraging students to choose their topics and integrates real life experiences through field trips. Alternate assessment, 6:1:1, students with autism are also receiving AIS on an individual basis and use Unique, Voyager and Edmark (focuses on beginning reading and language development for non-readers), word games, Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) and Discrete Trial Instruction (DTI) An AIS/IEP/Testing school based teacher will be integrated to assist teachers and students alike. On the elementary level, use of games, manipulatives and drill exercises aimed at building fact and operation skills will be used. Additionally, Ready – NYS CCLS Math (used to reinforce the “hows” of taking an exam) Small group, one-to-one tutoring and peer tutoring will be used as appropriate a minimum of one period Academic Intervention Services will be provided to all students during the school day per week 2018-19 CEP 42  Science Academic Intervention Services will be provided to all students who scored Level 1 and Level 2 on the 4th grade State Science exam according to NCLB/SEDD during the school day. and NYC Mathematics Practice for Mastery (with drill and practice) have been used for AIS. Smartboards, Ipads and laptop carts were used at all elementary school sites. During Chapter 683 2016, 2017 and 2018, we incorporated the Chancellor's Summer in the City through Math Navigator and "Do the Math." This focuses on varied intervention techniques, presented in a slower pace and integrates hands on activities. Real life experiences through field trips are encouraged. Alternate assessment, 6:1:1, students with autism are also receiving AIS on an individual basis and use Equals, Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) and Discrete Trial Instruction (DTI) Use of hands on materials (i.e. science kits through FOSS and Pearson/Scott Foresman), test prep materials will be used for 4th grade science exam. Technology at all levels and integration into all curriculum areas will be encouraged. Smartboards, Ipads and laptop carts were Small group, one-to-one tutoring and peer tutoring will be used as appropriate a minimum of one period per week. Academic Intervention Services will be provided to all students during the school day 2018-19 CEP 43 Small group, one-to-one tutoring and peer tutoring will be used as appropriate a minimum of one period per week Academic Intervention Services will be provided to all students during the school day Academic Intervention Services will be provided to all students during the school day. Small group, one-to-one sessions and peer tutoring will be used as appropriate. In addition to related service mandates for counseling, students in crisis are seen immediately on an individual basis. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 5th grade Social Studies State exams are no longer administered, however, in accordance with Common Core Learning Standards and Citywide Expectations, informational text from Social Studies concepts and facts are integrated into tutoring following the new Scope and Sequence. Students in crisis, requiring temporary hospitalization, ACS removal or intensive case management receive additional sessions on an individual basis and/or parent meetings as needed used at all elementary sites An AIS/IEP/Testing school based teacher will be integrated to assist teachers and students alike. Targeted support of SS topics through the adapted Passport to Social Studies CCLSUnits of Study will continue. Technology through Smartboards, ipads and laptop computers will be integrated into sessions with a focus on geography. All students with a one to one crisis paraprofessional have a Behavior Intervention Plan as part of the IEP and an additional Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA). Both plans are written collaboratively with the classroom teacher and the counselor. FBA’s are reviewed weekly to determine if there is a decrease in negative behaviors. If students are hospitalized, school personnel will continue visitation and contact. Girls Club is held once a week in small groups of students who have earned the right to participate through their behavior plan as specified by Power of 2018-19 CEP 44  Choice. Level trips and Level certificates are earned by the students. For alternate assessment 6:1:1 students, “First/Then” and “Token” boards are used. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  We are a D75 program - We have no Title 1 set aside funds. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. As a D75 program - We do not receive Title 1 funds 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 49  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 4Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 4Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meeting and other activities, in a format and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations: literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 52  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 4Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 53  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the common Core State Learning standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed, as well as, how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; parent workshops, etc. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 55  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PQ004 will support our students' language development through the use of the arts with the Title III funding. The focus of the program will be to increase students' acquisition of language and self-expression, provide real world learning experiences which represent cultural individuality, and enhance creativity and cultural awareness through art. A Saturday instructional program by Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (L.E.A.P) company will be planned as a supplemental instructional service using Title III funds. The Saturday program will be offered to 2 different groups of students; the A.M. session will be for the 6:1:1, and the P.M. session will be for the 12:1:1. Both groups will be for grades K-2, including two bilingual Spanish speaking students. A Spanish speaking alternate placement paraprofessional will be there to assist in any language barriers by translating/interpreting key terminology as needed.The eight (8) sessions are to be held between 8:00 a.m and 3:00 p.m. (including a 1 hour unpaid lunch). One group of 6 will attend 8 morning sessions (8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.) and the other group of 12 will attend the 8 afternoon (12:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.) sessions by each student cohort. The students are to be brought to the main site (P4Q@179) by their parents or guardians. Families will stay with their child during all student workshop sessions. This program will be implemented as an additional support for our ELL students. Direct instruction will be delivered in English in cooperation with the teaching artist from L.E.A.P, an administrator, a licensed ESOL teacher and an alternate placement paraprofessional using effective scaffolding techniques and ENL methodologies, such as Total Physical Response, the 'Natural Approach', Whole Language Instruction, the use of graphic organizers, tactile activities and the Language Experience Approach. The L.E.A.P program will be held on Saturdays at P4Q@179 (main site) from November 2018 to February 2019. The students will engage in custom designed workshops provided by a teaching artist from L.E.A.P in conjunction with the ENL teacher, involving creating art from various art materials. Workshops are tailored to meet the individual needs of the ELL students, using varied art experiences and grade appropriate curriculum. Following NYC's Blueprint for the Arts, the program supports student achievement in the classroom and inspires a lifelong passion for learning and discovery. Students will develop self confidence in this discipline due to the programs emphasis on self-expression. Students will create art projects from various art materials which empower them as artists, creators, and communicators by showing them that, if they are resourceful, they always have art-making and project-making materials available to them. Students will be brought by their families and receive supplemental instruction in small and/or individualized groupings. The program will be staffed by one licensed English/Spanish speaking ENL teacher, a bilingual Spanish speaking paraprofessional and one supervisor. Parent training will be offered by the ENL teacher and one alternate placement paraprofessional with the supervisor on site. Supplies will be provided by L.E.A.P for the workshops, any remaining material will be kept by the ENL teacher to use in the classroom. Refreshments will be served to the parents. The program will culminate with a student/parent evaluation session. During L.E.A.P workshops, all participants will be engaged in learning creative ways to use various 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information types of art materials in order to be empowered to create art and become more versatile communicators. - Eight (8) 6 hour Saturday Student Workshops will be held on November 3, 2018, November 17, 2018, December 1, 2018, December 8, 2018, December 15, 2018, January 12, 2019, January 26, 2018 and February 2, 2019 from 8:00 a.m. and 3 p.m (including a 1 hour unpaid lunch). Six morning and six afternoon sessions will be co-lead by the L.E.A.P artist. The ENL teacher will lead two morning and two afternoon sessions, with the assistance of the alternate placement paraprofessional at all workshops. The administrator will be on site for all weekend sessions. iPads will be used during each of the workshops with apps set up for art exploration, to take photos and videotape their experiences. Apps on the iPads will encourage comprehension, focus and communication. Any other additional needed materials will be purchased through Title III funding. A laptop computer will also available to the ENL teacher to use for students and their parents for home language surveys, direct instruction to the students, e-mails to parents, SESIS, ATS, the creation of flyers, surveys, and communication regarding the Title III program to the parents. The additional materials purchased will remain with the ENL teacher/students to support instruction during the 2018-2019 school year. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development will be lead by the ENL teacher for three 3 hour sessions on November 5, 2018, December 10, 2018 and January 14, 2019 from 3:40 p.m. to 6:40 p.m. after extended Mondays' (no staff is on the clock. The PD sessions will involve all staff members (administrator and paraprofessional) in the program. The ENL teacher will lead the PD for all staff (AP and Alternate placement paraprofessional) who are part of the Title III program. Staff will be shown different examples of the ways in which they can utilize art materials to add hands-on instruction to their regular curriculum, giving them ways to differentiate the education of their students. Handouts and materials will be provided to participants. These professional development workshops are scheduled to extensively explore the creation of art from various art materials, helping the educators make artistic and curricular connections to the production of art. It will introduce the basic tools of art, which can be used during the instructional day with the ELL students. The professional development will explore a range of relevant subjects, such as curriculum development, problem solving, quality teaching, questioning techniques, cultural appreciation, self-expression, and aesthetics. Educational materials provided by L.E.A.P and/or the ENL teacher will be distributed to the Title III staff members in hard copy and electronic media. Additionally, the participants will evaluate the professional development workshops verbally and/or through written surveys. The ENL teacher will lead the professional development workshops and work with the Title III staff connecting the art form to the pedagogical approaches used to address the ENL and ELA connections being reinforced during the afternoon program. Topics to be discussed will include appropriate benchmarks from different grade levels from the NYC Blueprint for the Arts grades K-2. The Professional Development Workshops will include different examples of ways in which various art materials can be 2018-19 CEP 60  Part C: Professional Development utilized for hands-on instruction in the regular curriculum. Additionally, it will demonstrate how to differentiate instruction for the ELL students. The outcomes of these workshops will lead ELL students to feel comfortable enough to create art freely and spontaneously with their families, their community, and at student gatherings. They will be able to better express enjoyment of art, access art websites using iPads in guided sessions, and find information about art using websites, videos, books, etc. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Parent Engagement component will begin with families of the ELL students being invited to an introductory one (1) three hour workshop. The L.E.A.P program will be presented during this introductory Parent Engagement workshop on October 17, 2018 from 2:20 p.m. to 5:20 p.m. We will introduce the staff to the ELL parents to answer any questions or concerns. The parents may then stay for a P.T.A meeting, which will begin at 5:30 p.m. at P4Q@179. During the Parent Engagement Saturday workshops families will participate in making collaborative art projects that motivate them to communicate with one another, experience the satisfaction of success in the creative arena, and to share information about themselves and background with one another. The parents will be participating in the regular instructional activities with their children, part of the PE funds were allocated for additional direct instruction sessions.Notification to the parents about the Title III program will be sent by flyers, emails and follow-up phone calls in the parent's home language and through the school’s parent coordinator. Translation services will be provided. In addition, refreshments will be provided to parents after each workshop. By providing these workshops, our families will be better prepared to support their child’s language development and creativity at home. The family engagement goals include: 1- Providing high quality art programming to students and families who have limited opportunities to formally participate in the arts; 2- Involving the families in their child’s education by helping them to develop new skills and strategies through engaging their special needs child in family activities; 3- Connecting students and their families to cultural resources in NYC; 4- Helping increase parent involvement using the arts as a catalyst to strengthen the home/school connection. During the workshops, participants will be engaged in learning creative ways that they can use various art materials, in order to be empowered to create art and become more versatile communicators. The families will participate in making collaborative art projects that motivate them to communicate with one another, experience the satisfaction of success in the creative arena, and to share about themselves and background with one another. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem INSTRUCTIONAL WORKSHOPS Adm. $3045.60 Tchr. $2911.20 Para. $1667.04 Secretary $112.11 Subtotal $7735.95 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT Admin $571.05 Teacher $545.85 Para. $312.57 Subtotal $1429.47 PARENT ENGAGEMENT Admin $132.17 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. INSTRUCTIONAL WORKSHOPS Saturday Workshops 1 site administrator x 8 sessions x 6 hrs per week x $63.45 = $3045.60 1 ENL Teacher x 8 sessions x 6 hrs per week x $60.65 = $2911.20 1 Alternate Placement Paraprofessional x 8 sessions x 6 hrs per week x $34.73 = $1667.04 1 Secretary x 3 hrs x $37.37= $112.11 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 1 site admin x 3 sessions x 3 hrs per week x $63.45= $571.05 Note- Supervisor is not on clock at 3:15 p.m. 1 ENL teacher x 3 sessions x 3 hrs per week x $60.65= $545.85 1 alternate placement paraprofessional x 3 sessions x 3 hours per week x$34.73 = $312.57 2018-19 CEP 62  Teacher $181.95 Para. $104.19 Subtotal $418.31 Grand Total $9583.73 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. INSTRUCTIONAL Total $1820.00 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. PARENT ENGAGEMENT P.T.A Parent Engagement Workshop 1 site admin x 1 sessions x 2.083 hrs per week x $63.45= $132.17 Note Supervisor is not on the clock at 3:15 p.m. 1 ENL teacher x 1 sessions x 3 hrs per week x $60.65= $181.95 1 alternate placement paraprofessional x 1 session x 3 hrs per week x $34.73= $104.19 INSTRUCTIONAL 12 Saturday Parent Student Workshops @ $130 each = $1560.00 (6 weekends with 2 workshops) 1 Planning meeting = $260.00 2018-19 CEP 63 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Books, Educational games Supplies- $462.27 The materials purchased will remain with the ENL teacher/students for their educational use $0.00 $0.00 Parent Engagement for Parent Refreshments = $250.00 (Object Code 489) Art Supplies for Parent Engagement Activities = $250.00 $12,366.00 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $462.27 $0.00 $0.00 $500.00 TOTAL $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P 4 Queens Borough Queens School Number 004 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marcy Berger Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melissa Colmenares Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Bailey- Classrm. Teacher/Subject Area Joyce Ruocco - Art Related-Service Provider Edwin Santiago -P.T. Superintendent Assistant Principal Alexandria Markovich Coach NA School Counselor Erin Rappaport Parent Heather Christensen Parent Coordinator Vanessa Murray Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Adrianna Spadafora (ENL) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 65  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 385 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.40% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P4Q uses the following CCLS aligned curriculum and formative assessments to guide instructional planning for ELLs after reviewing quantitative and qualitative data: -Standard Assessment ELL students are using teacher created assessments from: Ready Gen, Go Math, FOSS, Passport to Social Studies and the city approved formative assessments ie: NYC Performance Tasks and Performance Series in ELA and Math to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. -Alternative Assessment ELL students are using program based assessments from: Unique, Attainment, EQUALS Math, teacher created assessments from: FOSS , Passport to Social Studies, ABA data and the city approved formative assessment FAST, to guide instructional planning for alternate assessment ELLs. Traditionally in both groups, the ELA scores are in need of improvement and are the schools focus. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Once a week during the extended day, all instructional staff meet to discuss individual students using a P4Q created template to view the student as a "whole child". Observations, data and next steps are discussed during this time. Progress is tracked using results from IEPs, rubric, ABA data, NYC Performance tasks, Scantron Performance Series, FAST, Unique benchmarks, EQUALS tests, and end of unit assessments in Ready Gen and Go Math. The instructional team work together to to adjust the students' goals as needed throughout the school year. Data and next steps are also discussed during pre / post observation meetings with administrators. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments used are state / city mandated exams. Standard Assessment students are administered the NYC Performance Tasks, Scantron Performance Series and NYS exams in ELA, Math and Science. Alternate Assessment students are administered SANDI and NYSAA datafolios in ELA, Math and Science. English language learners take all the mandated Standard or Alternate summative exams as well as the NYSESLAT . 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Administration , the testing coordinator, and the unit coordinators review the summative data results first. It is then given to the CFI, now SIT, who analyze the findings and then help to write the SCEP goals for the following year, with baseline, midyear, and end year benchmarks. The team members and unit coordinators review the results with the teachers during extended Mondays and during their prep periods. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Once the ELL learning profile has been established, using multiple indicators, including the Home Language Survey (HLIS), the IEP, a variety of assessments and test scores, collected data are used to hone in on specific issues for intervention. Once the plan is in place, data is reviewed to determine whether a child is making gains to monitor the effectiveness of supports and ensure that any mid-course corrections are undertaken. Additional support services (RTI and AIS) are provided after reviewing test scores, number of years of instruction in a English as a New Language (ENL) program, English and home language literacy, content area and socio-emotional support needs of Students with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), specific English literacy needs of long-term ELLs, results on the annual NYSESLAT, and the students’ teacher’s recommendation. AIS is provided to all P4Q ELL Alternate and Standardized students who scored less then a level 3 on the NYSAA ELA (Alternate) or NYS ELA (Standard). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. For all of our Alternative Assessment students, including ELLs, formative / summative assessment outcomes are used to evaluate and inform ELL programs- ie: Unique benchmarks, Attainment, EQUALS Math, Passport to Social Studies, FAST/SANDI, unit assessments, teacher created assessments, CCLS aligned rubric, ABA data, and NYSAA datafolios in ELA, Math and Science. For all of our Standard Assessment students, including ELLs, formative / summative assessment outcomes are used to evaluate and inform ELL programs- ie: we are using the CCLS aligned curriculum's- Ready Gen, Go Math, FOSS, Passport to Social Studies, unit assessments, teacher created assessments, CCLS aligned rubric, NYC Performance Series, NYC Performance Tasks, NYS exams in ELA, Math and Science. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data are disseminated and shared with teachers during common preps, collaborative team meetings, on extended Mondays and during pre & post observation meetings with administrators. Teachers write their own Professional Performance Plan with a SMART goal (with baseline, midyear and end year benchmarks) specific to improving instruction after analyzing test results. Collaborative groups and after school meetings involve trainings on how to analyze the assessments’ 2018-19 CEP 67  data. Teachers work together during team meetings to norm rubrics results and other assessments. Portfolios go from one year to the next year’s teacher to start at the correct entry point. Teachers run their own informal PDs both group and small group. Professional development workshops are driven by data analysis of a variety of assessments and new curriculum. PPT meetings are held with a P4Q created template to be used during extended Mondays to view the “whole child.” Conversations among staff include paraprofessionals who have taken ownership and are an integral part of the extended Monday PDs. Coverage teachers and related service providers participate in all PDs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Out of the 67 total ENL students, 56 have IEPs indicating ENL ONLY and 11 have an Alternate Placement paraprofessional. ENL is provided by 1 full-time dually certified ENL teacher and 1 full-time ENL teacher, through a Stand-Alone and Integrated model of instruction. As per the new mandates on Part 154, all ENL students receive Stand-Alone and Integrated instruction. During Stand-Alone instruction, the ENL teachers provide the students with the skills necessary to develop English language skills so that the students can succeed in their core content courses. During Integrated instruction, the ENL teachers build English language skills through content area instruction. Integrated instruction is delivered by the dually certified teacher in a separate office or therapy room, or by the ENL teacher co-teaching with the content area teacher within the classroom. All classes are heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our multi-sited school organization. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During the Stand-Alone model, the ENL teachers use “Sheltered English”. It is an approach to teaching English that provides the students with age-appropriate content while simultaneously promoting English proficiency. During Integrated instruction the ENL teachers use “Whole Language”. All teachers that work with ELLs use a variety of methodologies throughout the day including Sheltered English, CALLA, Total Physical Response, Natural Approach, Whole Language Approach, and the Language and Experience Approach. P4Q continues to increase rigor to improve reading and writing skills. In addition, we want all students to learn critical thinking and comprehension skills in order to communicate ideas to a range of audiences and to exhibit their knowledge through an array of media and genre. Test scores and additional teaching strategies for ELLs are discussed at collaborative team meetings 2018-19 CEP 68  and extended Professional Development days. NYSESLAT results reveal ELLs' areas of strength. Of the four modalities (Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening) ELLs show a trend in achieving their highest scores in the areas of Speaking and Listening; the lowest in the areas of Reading and Writing. The ENL teachers teach content areas with this in mind. The "EDL Language Inventory" of vocabulary at each grade level and subject is used as a reference guide along with information obtained through conferencing with academic subject teachers. For Standard Assessment classes, teachers use Ready Gen (K-5) for ELA/reading and GO Math instruction/assessments, using 90 minute blocks for both ELA and Math daily. For Alternate Assessment classes, teachers use: Unique and Attainment or ELA, and EQUALS and Attainment for Math. Classroom teachers, speech teachers and the ENL providers work collaboratively to identify students' strengths and weaknesses, as well as analyze and assess the student's sub-skills (i.e. phonics, fluency, vocabulary, reading comprehension, etc.). This assists the teachers with differentiating ELA instruction. Classroom libraries are available for use for all students to enhance learning. Content areas are taught to ELL students using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to ensure rigorous instruction. Core content is delivered in ENL through the use of ENL strategies such as, visual graphic organizers, audio, cooperative learning activities, KWL charts, role playing, modified classroom work based on level of English proficiency, and multi-cultural resources. A variety of methodologies are used throughout the day including Sheltered English, CALLA, TPR, Natural Approach, Whole Language Approach, Language and Experience Approach. The ENL teacher follows the pacing calendars in content specific subjects to provide content area support to the ELLs. The ENL teacher uses the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP) when creating appropriate instruction. Webb's DOK is a tool (Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DOK) which provides a vocabulary and a frame of reference when thinking about our students and how they engage with the content. DOK offers a common language to understand "rigor," or cognitive demand, in assessments, as well as curricular units, lessons, and tasks. Webb developed four DOK levels that grow in cognitive complexity and provide educators a lens on creating more cognitively engaging and challenging tasks). Webb’s DOK makes content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P4Q at this time does not have a bilingual program. Students who are mandated to receive bilingual services are provided with an alternate placement paraprofessional in lieu of of being a bilingual classroom. Therefore, the students receives the CR Part 154 mandated ENL units of study and the services of an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the student's home language and English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? A bilingual school psychologist must be used at the Initial Planning meeting, the triennial meeting and whenever the psychologist is needed to test ELL students. When a student is in need of a bilingual assessment and there is no qualified professional at the school for the evaluation, the school psychologist or clerical/family worker requests assistance in obtaining a qualified professional from the Integrated Service Center by completing both the Request for Specialized Evaluation and the School Psychologist Request for Assistance Forms as per the Standard Operating Procedure Manual (SOPM). The school psychologist maintains responsibility for the case. An interpreter may not be used for Spanish Assessments as "Spanish speaking" school physiologists can readily be found. ELLs are assessed by their teachers with the assistance of the Alternate Placement paraprofessionals in their native language in the classrooms throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 2018-19 CEP 69  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, there are no S.I.F.E.s in our organization. SIFE students may not necessarily have a bilingual instruction mandate. P4Q’s plan for S.I.F.E.s is to place them in a class with an Alternate Placement paraprofessional, when their IEP is mandated for bilingual instruction, since P4Q does not have a bilingual program. If the SIFE student is ENL only they will receive tutoring, a student buddy, development of initial literacy in native language, and a nurturing environment to facilitate language production. S.I.F.E.s would be included in the NYSESLAT schedule each spring in order to determine their continued entitlement to ENL services, as well as to monitor their progress in all of the four modalities of language (Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing). This provides the ENL teacher with data that is vital to individualized lesson development and planning. Once a S.I.F.E. scores at Transitioning/Intermediate level on the NYSESLAT, S.I.F.E. status would be removed. b. Since at this time P4Q does not have a bilingual program, students who are mandated to receive bilingual instruction, an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional is provided to them, ensuring instruction is differentiated while supporting the students English language through the home language. Since students who are newcomers are generally at the Entering/Emerging (Newcomer) level, the ENL teacher strives to group them homogeneously in order to maximize the number of minutes and provide differentiated instruction using the various teaching methodologies mentioned during each session as per the students IEP. For example, when teaching reading and writing to an alternative assessment newcomer student, instruction will begin with letter identification and sounds, color identification and detailed functional vocabulary. When teaching speaking and listening the student would be asked to match with the correct answer and when possible attempt to say the first letter or demonstrate eye contact. When teaching reading and writing to a standard assessment student, instruction would begin with Dolch sight words, functional vocabulary, spelling and grammar. When teaching speaking and listening the student would participate in conversations related to instruction. The ENL teacher reviews IEPs, ELA assessments and conferences with classroom teachers to get basic information on students before administering their own informal assessments. Strengths and weaknesses are identified and individualized lessons are written. For Alternate Assessment ELLs, words are taught, re-taught and maintained using Applied Behavior Analysis methodologies. The teacher serves as coach, encouraging students to be more explicit and encourages students to have high expectations for their learning. In addition, students scoring Level 1 on New York State Standardized tests (i.e., ELA, Math, etc.) will be given additional support through AIS (Academic Intervention Services) after analyzing their areas for improvement specific to the individual student. LEP students with disabilities whose IEP recommends Bilingual instruction or ENL includes interventions which are embedded in their instruction. Our certified ENL teachers consult with the students’ classroom teachers and related service providers to assess student performance in the four modalities of English Language Learning: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The results of these discussions are then used to determine the most appropriate goals and performance indicators to be applied. c. Developing ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years also receive scaffolding instruction in all subjects. Lessons are aligned with pacing guides; reading, writing, listening and speaking activities are incorporated into lessons. Key vocabulary is emphasized throughout the lesson and the teacher provides oral and written preview and review. The majority of students are on task and are encouraged to communicate what they are doing. The teacher and paraprofessionals provide clarification and positive reinforcement. Our teachers devote adequate time to teaching content objectives and language objectives with the focus of building language-related skills and competencies that English learners need in order to comprehend the content. Students are exposed to the language of Math and Science before the teacher uses the Inquiry approach to Science — this is especially helpful to our English learners. Alternate Assessment ELLs will learn content related vocabulary through the use of icons with large pictures and a small word, icons with a small picture and large words, or just the printed word with the definition written out. These words are taught/re-taught and maintained using Applied Behavioral Analysis techniques. Developing students are expected to sort, show how to, edit and revise, analyse and write and/or verbalize step by step process. 2018-19 CEP 70  d. Long Term ELLs receiving services for more than 6 years continue to take the NYSESLAT test each Spring and the ENL teacher continues to monitor progress in each of the four modalities of language learning. They are taught using scaffolding instruction in all subjects. Lessons are aligned with pacing guides, reading, writing, listening, and speaking activities which are incorporated into lessons. Group activities are planned to encourage collaboration and peer interactions. Many ELLs are not yet able to actively participate in academic discussions. Teachers will model sentences encouraging ELLs to focus on the content and not the structure. Students are encouraged to organize and express their thoughts in written form (i.e. reports) or verbally (i.e. speeches). They are expected to compare, identify, predict, create and self assess across all modalities. The teacher serves as a coach encouraging students to be more explicit and always encourages students to have high expectations for their learning. This process continues until the student is either discharged from P4Q or receives a "Commanding" rating on NYSESLAT. e. Former ELLs (a student who has scored a "Commanding" rating on the NYSESLAT) would be entitled to receive an additional 2 years of Integrated ENL services at a rate of 90 minutes per week with the focus on writing skills provided by the ENL teacher . Former ELLs are expected to follow multiple linguistically oral directions, infer information, connect information from oral reading of grade level material to demonstrate comprehension strategies, make connections and draw conclusions, create original problems involving math embedded in scenarios and situations, involving all for modalities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P4Q follows the New York State New Language Arts Progressions and incorporates ENL research-based strategies for Standardized Assessment students such as CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach), TPR (Total Physical Response), Language Experience, Whole Language, graphic organizers and cooperative learning, using a Stand-Alone and Integrated model for duration of 50 minutes per session. Scaffolding instruction is practiced in all subjects. Lessons are aligned with pacing guides; reading, writing, listening and speaking activities are incorporated into lessons. Key vocabulary is emphasized throughout the lesson and the teacher provides oral and written preview and review. The teacher and paraprofessionals provide clarification and positive reinforcement. Our teachers devote adequate time to teaching content objectives and language objectives with the focus of building language-related skills and competencies that English learners need in order to comprehend the content. Students are exposed to the language of Math and Science before the teacher uses the Inquiry Approach to Science — this is especially helpful to our English learners. ELLs with autism will learn these words through the use of icons with large pictures and a small word, icons with a small picture and large words, or just the printed word with the definition written out. These words are taught/re-taught and maintained using Applied Behavior Analysis techniques. During the 2013-2014 school year, P4Q adopted all city approved CCLS curriculum materials to be used by the Standard Assessment, K- 5 classes, and we will continue to use it during the 2017-2018 school year. This includes: Ready Gen (ELA) in Grades K - 5; Go Math (Math) in grades K - 5; FOSS (Science) in Grades K-5 and Passport to Social Studies. Students in Alternate Assessment classes use CCLS approved materials as appropriate, i.e.: Unique (ELA), EQUALS (Math) and/or Attainment (ELA & Math) in grades PK-8. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Standard Assessment students learn and practice vocabulary skills within the content of the lesson—i.e. defining, summarizing, comparing, classifying, explaining, etc. Grammar and language structures from the lesson are identified, becoming topics for further instruction during the daily 90 minute ELA block. Group activities are planned to encourage collaboration and peer interactions. Many ELLs are not yet able to actively participate in academic discussions. Teachers model sentences encouraging ELLs to focus on the content and not the structure. Students are encouraged to organize and express their thoughts in written form (i.e. reports) or verbally (i.e. speeches). The teacher serves as a coach encouraging students to be more explicit and encourages students to have high expectations for their learning. While the students often score higher on the Speaking and Listening modalities of the NYSESLAT, an overall score of "Commanding" in the four modalities is necessary in order to be 2018-19 CEP 71  considered proficient in the English language. Due to our students’ severe cognitive and communication disabilities, as well as their English Language acquisition needs, our ELL students continue to be entitled to ENL services for a longer period of time when compared to their typically developing peers, in order for them to acquire the communication skills in the target language. Two of our sites are self-contained and our Special Education students do not have the opportunity to interact with non-disabled peers on a daily basis. Our other three sites’ schedules are programmed to encourage interactions with the general education population. This is done during lunch period and special school programs, which help the ELLs practice and attain English proficiency within a least restrictive environment. Scheduling is assigned according to state mandated regulations in all academics subjects including ENL. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Curricula and interventions include: CCLS ELA / Math Test prep workbooks, Wilson's Fundations, Attainment, Ready for New York CCLS,Unique and Summer Success (Chapter 683 program), Picture Exchange Communication (PECS), Discrete Trial Instruction (DTI), and Sight Words (K-2). For Mathematics, Go-Math (K-5), Equals, PECS, DTI, Math the Write Way, Ready New York CCLS. For Science, FOSS Kits and Reading for Content. For Social Studies, NYS Document-Based Questions, Map Skills, Picturing America, and CCLS ELA Units aligned with Common Core Social Studies Curriculum. During the summer, Standard Assessment classes use Summer Success for ELA and Math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PQ004 will not introduce any new programs this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in all activities, all programs, and all services offered throughout the P4Q The computer lab at 179 (the main site) is open to all students and each classroom has a minimum of two computers, which are accessible to all students. All services and supports are provided as mandated by the IEP for each student scheduled to receive such services, modifications and materials (including technological support). During the 2017-2018, P4Q offered a Title III after-school program at the main site from 8:00 a.m. to 3 p.m.. on Saturdays. Title III funds were used to involve for ENL students promoting inter-personal relationships and social skills with their parents. Different artists from L.E.A.P worked with students and parents for nine sessions, teaching about creating various art works with materials, with a culminating display of works created. The same company will be used during the 2018-2019 school year. At Skillman, one of our off sites, we run a CHAMPS (Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated, and Positive Students) program. The CHAMPS Sport and Fitness Program is an initiative of the New York City Department of Education that promotes physical activity among children going through the critical years of middle school. There were fourteen students that participated and three of them were ELLs. The focus of the program was fitness, hockey and tennis respectively for each trimester. These activities, developmentally appropriate, encourage sportsmanship, communication, teamwork and socialization skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 72  Materials used to support ELL's include: Ready Gen, Unique, Attainment, Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), Discrete Trial Instruction (DTI), Sight Words (K-2); Go Math, EQUALS Mathematics, FOSS Science kits, Scott Foresman Science; Passport to Social Studies, Map Skills, and Picturing America. IPads are used with a variety of apps (i.e. Kneoworld, BananaMath, RazKids, EduPaint, SeralBulbs and ParallelBulbs) in all academic subjects, as well as a means of communication for non-verbal students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language is assessed throughout the HLIS and the NYSITELL. P4Q at this time does not have a bilingual program. Students who are mandated to receive bilingual services or TBE are provided with an alternate placement paraprofessional in lieu of of being a bilingual classroom. Therefore, the students receives the CR Part 154 mandated ENL units of study and the services of an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the student's home language and English. The ENL teacher provides support in the target language (English) for students whose test scores and performance in the four modalities of language learning, indicates a need for such intervention. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Related Services (PT, OT, Speech) are provided to ELLs as per their IEP mandates. Standard and Alternate Assessment ELLs receive all state mandated subjects as per grade requirements and/or age. Various age and grade specific CCLS curriculum's are used in all content areas. All curriculum's used are adapted to ensure differentiation of instruction as per the individual students’ IEP. Subjects are programmed as per NYS mandated minutes per week. ENL services are provided as per the mandated minutes specified in Part 154.2 according to the individual NYSESLAT results. The budget is aligned to ensure all required services and resources are provided to ELLs. Students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our multi-sited schools organization. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Three of our off sites are located in general education buildings and offer us the opportunity to use the gym, lunchroom, and participate in assemblies. P4@213Q and PS213Q are a "Collaborative School Community". P4Q students with one general education class built a community garden and will be continuing to work together to grow vegetables. Students from both schools performed in the student talent show, recycled, participated in the Robotics Fairs at the STEAM Museum, and were part of the student's Emergency Preparedness Training program. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students meet with the ENL teacher and she assesses their IEP, test scores and individual needs. This information assists in making recommendations regarding the newly admitted student. The guidance counselors do an intake with the parent(s)/guardian(s). In addition, a conversation is had with the classroom teacher, coverage teachers and the related service providers offering them suggestions as to what may help the child transition smoothly into the school. The newly admitted students participate in all activities offered at the school and within the district. All ELLs enrolled in P4Q's programs are eligible to participate in Chapter 683 (the summer District 75 program). All newcomers receive tutoring, a student buddy and a nurturing environment to facilitate language production through modeling and monitoring trends in performance across all academic areas throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, P4Q does not offer language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 73  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, P4Q only features the ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL staff attend district-sponsored ELL trainings and turnkey information during LAP (Language Allocation Policy) committee meetings, at cabinet meetings, and on extended professional development Mondays to all including all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff helping them meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154. Additional professional development for teachers is held throughout the year. The ENL teachers participate in professional development given by District 75 to enhance their repertoire and teaching ability. The ENL teacher provides on-going professional development on a monthly basis throughout P4Q's sites. They work with teachers during common preps, professional periods, extended Mondays, and on scheduled staff development training days. Additionally, our Title III program provides professional development to participating staff, given by facilitators associated with the contracted organization, and integrated into the program, besides receiving PD from the artists, the ENL teacher provides three PDs in which Title III staff will attend receive arts/linguistic directed ENL professional development. All staff members are required to attend a minimum of 10 hours of ELL training. Recently hired members attend the Jose P. training provided by the district each year. In addition, the dually certified ENL teacher provides ongoing Professional Development to staff in a variety of topics throughout the school year. Title III Professional Development, provided by the the ENL teacher, is also offered to the Title III staff for three (3) 3 hour sessions during the 2018-2019 school year as part of the Title III program. Topics scheduled are as follows: September Analyzing NYSESLAT results October Title III November Establish Students Goals and IEP Development December Communicating with ENL students and their families January Differentiated instruction with the ELL Students and their families February Instructional Strategies and Resources for Teachers with ENL Students March Challenges and Issues of Instructing Alternate Assessment ENL Students April Test Preparation for ENL Students May Administering the NYSESLAT June Next Steps All staff (Assistant Principals, ENL teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologist, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinator) participate in these professional development opportunities. In addition, the DOE offers annual ELL-specific, research-based professional development aligned to CCLS, NLAP, and NYSED's Blueprint for ELL Success in order to satisfy the 50% of ENL teacher professional development required by the Commissioner's Regulations. The DOE's DELLSS also collaborates with external corporations, such as the United Federation of Teachers (UFT), to provide high quality, on-going, professional development and training sessions to teachers regarding closing the achievement gap for all students. 2018-19 CEP 74  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL staff provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English Language Learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers, including teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff, prescribed by CR Part 154.2 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. ENL specific professional development is offered by the city, to all teachers, which is held throughout the school year. The ENL teachers participate in professional development given by District 75 to enhance their repertoire and teaching ability, they then turnkey the information to all staff during the extended days. Recently hired members attend the Jose P. training provided by the district each year. The ENL staff attend district-sponsored ELL trainings throughout the school year. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of their required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. District 75 ENL coaches also provide support to the ENL teachers. Topics for Professional Development Monday’s are scheduled as follows: September- Assessments overview October- DOK questions November- Question Stems December- Writing Samples January- Alignment of curriculum to CCLS February- Differentiation of Instruction March- Testing Procedures April- Use of CCLS district made rubrics May- Outcomes of Assessments June- NYSESLAT Professional Development, provided by the the ENL teacher, is also offered to the staff for three (3) 3 hour sessions during the 2018-2019 school year as part of the Title III program. The ENL teacher will provide workshops to Title III staff and the assigned administrator. These workshops are scheduled to extensively explore the creation of art from various art materials, helping the educators make artistic and curricular connections to the production of art. It introduces the basic tools of art, which can be used during the instructional day with the ELL students. It explores a range of relevant subjects, such as curriculum development, problem solving, quality teaching, questioning techniques, cultural appreciation, self-expression, and aesthetics. Educational materials provided by L.E.A.P and/or the ENL teacher distributed to the Title III staff in hard copy and electronic media. Additionally, the participants will evaluated the professional development workshops verbally and/or through written surveys. The ENL teacher will work with the Title III staff to connect the art form to the pedagogical approaches used to address the ENL and ELA connections being reinforced during the afternoon program. Topics discussed included appropriate benchmarks from different grade levels from the NYC Blueprint for the Arts grades K - 2. The Professional Development Workshops showed teachers different examples of ways in which they can utilize various art materials for hands-on instruction in their regular curriculum in addition to teaching them how to differentiate the education of their ELL students. The outcomes of these workshops will help ELL students feel comfortable enough to create art freely and spontaneously with their families, their community, and at student gatherings. They will express enjoyment of art, access art websites using iPads in guided sessions, and find information about art using websites, videos, books, etc. Handouts were provided to participants. Records are kept in the Title III Compliance binder (ie. agendas, attendance records, lesson plans, hand outs, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 75  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher meets with the parents during the yearly IEP meetings as well as at Parent-Teacher Meetings. Parents are invited to individual meetings to discuss their child's progress during the school’s weekly after-school parent engagement time on extended Tuesdays. The ENL teacher sends quarterly progress reports in addition to report card grades 4x's a year. The ENL teachers are available to return phone calls to parents with an alternate placement paraprofessional when necessary to interpret a language other than Spanish which the ENL teacher is fluent in. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Q004 is comprised of five sites in the borough of Queens. To address challenges this presents to parental involvement, we have provided varied PTA meeting hours, translation services, and weekend programs at several of our sites. Project Arts funding allows the school the opportunity to invite various artists to entertain and educate students during assemblies, exposing them to different cultures. Our students benefit from the five boroughs' cultural richness and diversity through participation in thematic class trips. Community affiliations add to our school organization as well. Title III funds are used to bring in an artist in residence for an after-school program where parents create works of art alongside their child. The Parent Involvement component of Title III begins with families of the ELL students being invited to a 1 three hour meeting during the Fall of 2018 between 2:20 p.m. to 5:20 p.m. at P4Q at 179 (main building). Notification to the parents about the Title III program are sent by flyers, emails and follow-up phone calls in the parent's home language and through the school’s parent coordinator. Translation services are provided. Refreshments are provided to parents after each workshop. By providing these workshops, our families are better prepared to support their child’s language development and creativity at home. The family engagement goals include: 1- Providing high quality art programming to students and families who have limited opportunities to formally participate in the arts; 2- Involving the families in their child’s education by helping them to develop new skills and strategies through engaging their special needs child in family activities; 3- Connecting students and their families to cultural resources in NYC; 4- Helping increase parent involvement using the arts as a catalyst to strengthen the home/school connection. The families bring their child to the workshops and work alongside them. During the afternoon workshops, participants are engaged in learning creative ways that they can use various art materials, in order to be empowered to create art and become more versatile communicators. The families participate in making collaborative art projects that motivate them to communicate with one another, experience the satisfaction of success in the creative arena, and to share about themselves and background with one another. A culminating celebration occurs for both families and staff, building community amongst multi-generational participants. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. none 2018-19 CEP 76  2018-19 CEP 77 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marcy Berger, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 78  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P 4 Queens School DBN: 75Q004 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marcy Berger Title Principal Alexandria Markovich Assistant Principal Vanessa Murray Parent Coordinator Melissa Colmenares ENL/Bilingual Teacher Heather Christensen Parent Elizabeth Bailey -Classroom Teacher/Subject Area Joyce Ruocco- Art Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Erin Rappaport School Counselor NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other 10/09/2018 ENL Teacher Other 10/09/2018 n/a Other 10/09/2018 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 10/09/2018 Adriana Spadafora NA NA 2018-19 CEP 79  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q004 School Name: P4Q Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vanessa Murray Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, P4Q uses the parent response from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Parent's Preferred Languages Report (RCPL)- ATS report, Report Adult Preferred Language (RAPL)- the ATS report, the student emergency contact card and teachers' classroom surveys. This information is shared with the parent coordinator in order for her to send pertinent letters and fliers home in the parents/guardians written language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 80  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bengla in Bangladesh) Chinese Any Cantonese Korean Macedonian Mandarin English Spanish Tibetan Urdu Cham Punjabi Moldavian 2 7 30 0 7 0 0 535 55 0 3 0 1 0 .31 1.09 4.69 0 1.09 0 0 83.59 8.59 0 .47 0 .16 0 2 11 13 1 7 1 9 536 55 1 1 1 1 1 .31 1.72 2.03 .16 1.09 .16 1.41 83.75 8.59 .16 .16 .16 .16 .16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Annual handbooks September 2018 Newsletters & Calendars Monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bilingual staff is available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. The Department of Education’s website is used for many of the parent newsletters, already available in various languages. Bilingual staff is 2018-19 CEP 81  Parent Teacher Conference Announcements November & March NYS Test Dates September 2018, with monthly reminders starting December 2019 ending June 2019 Student curriculum September 2018 School Leadership Team Monthly Progress Reports December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019 PTA invitations and fliers Monthly Parent workshops and D75 family Engagement activities Monthly available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. The Department of Education’s website is used for both Parent Teacher Conference Announcements, available in various languages. The Department of Education’s website is used for the NYS test date calendar, available in various languages. Bilingual staff is available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. Bilingual staff is available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. Bilingual staff is available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. Bilingual staff is available to translate all native languages found in P4Q. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. The Department of Education’s website and district 75's Superintendent's Weekly are used for many parent letters, already available in various languages. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is utilized. 2018-19 CEP 82  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences D75 11/19/2018 and 11/20/2018 Parent Teacher Conferences Elementary 11/14/2018 and 11/15/2018 Parent Teacher Conferences D75 03/14/2019 and 03/15/2019 Parent Teacher Conferences Elementary 03/13/2019 and 03/14/2019 interpretation service(s)? All P4Q’s oral interpretation services are performed in house by a school staff member fluent in the native parent/guardian’s language. During evening meetings, bilingual staff will be available and will be paid per session. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, outside vendors will be solicited through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All P4Q’s oral interpretation services are performed in house by a school staff member fluent in the native parent/guardian’s language. During evening meetings, bilingual staff will be available and will be paid per session. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, outside vendors will be solicited through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All P4Q’s oral interpretation services are performed in house by a school staff member fluent in the native parent/guardian’s language. During evening meetings, bilingual staff will be available and will be paid per session. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, outside vendors will be solicited through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All P4Q’s oral interpretation services are performed in house by a school staff member fluent in the native parent/guardian’s language. During evening meetings, bilingual staff will be available and will be paid per session. If a native language is new to the school, with no in house supports, outside vendors will be solicited through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 83  Oral interpretation services are performed in house by a school staff member fluent in the native parent/guardian’s language. In case of a school emergency a P4Q staff member would call the family to relate the information in their native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the start of the 2018-2019 school year, an ENL Professional Development will be given to all staff, which will include a review of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Information regarding how to use the translation services over-the-phone and a chart listing bilingual staff with the language(s) they are fluent in will be distributed. Tax levy allocations are scheduled in the allocation categories -TL Translation Services and TL Translation Services CW. Title III funds are scheduled in the allocation category- Title III Translation Services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P4Q will provide each parent requiring language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, as well as, a Guide to Language Access letter. P4Q has posted at the front entrance of the school, a sign in each of the covered languages or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. P4Q's school’s Safety Plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents, in need of language access services, are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If there is no in-house translation/interpretation available, P4Q will provide the parent with information on how they can request free translation or interpretation services. The Language Access Coordinator/Parent Coordinator provides translated information for many parent engagement events such as PTA meetings, parent nights, community events, District 75 events and more. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P4Q uses the Learning Environment Survey as the feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The Learning Environment Survey is given to all parents in their respective home language to ensure that all parents have a voice. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Response Rates, 99% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. We will continue to have an open conversation with current parents and all incoming parents. 2018-19 CEP 84  A flier will be sent home in the appropriate home language to attend a PTA meeting where ELL families will be invited to join a focus group, inclusive of all cultures and languages, on how to improve communication between family and school. 2018-19 CEP 85 
