2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q005 School Name: I.S. 5 - THE WALTER CROWLEY INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL Principal: KELLY NEPOGODA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Intermediate School 5 24Q005 342400010005 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 50-40 Jacobus Street Elmhurst, NY 11373 718-205-6788 Phone Number: 718-429-6518 Fax: Kelly Nepogoda kdobson@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kelly Nepogoda MiekeSayles SheidellaGomez Meagan Kelly YoomiOh N/A N/A Frances Sanchez District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Taub-Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 Avenue Corona, NY 11368 MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kelly Nepogoda MiekeSayles SheidellaGomez N/A YoomiOh N/A N/A Frances Sanchez William Morgan Sheryl Winkler Christina Koenig *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/CSA Member/ CSA 2018-19 CEP 5  YoomiOh Name DevikaSewpaul Meagan Kelly Amber Malone Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/Elected Parent - Member/Elected Parent - Treasurer Member/ Elected Parent – Secretary Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT – SLT Chairperson Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The vision and mission of I.S. 5 still continues to message our daily goal to meet the expectations of the Framework for Great Schools with purpose, clarity and commitment. We believe that, if the mission is applied each day with fidelity, and is always at the heart of planning, preparation, instruction, and our collective responsibility for professional growth then we are preparing our children for the expectations of a changing world, and for the rigors and innovation of the 21st century college and careers. When we follow our core values that are exemplified in the school's vision and mission, we, then, nourish the trust that is needed by all stakeholders to succeed as a learning organization. Our vision at IS 5 is that we “Talk like Scholars, Write like Experts, Think like Innovators, Live like 2018-19 CEP 9  Leaders.” We believe that this vision, and the why and how at its core, shows the core values of our school community and when we stay true to our core values, we set the stage for the teaching and learning environment where students learn best. This mission of I.S. 5 is currently at the heart of our teacher collaboration work, in order to ensure teacher voice and perspective in its creation and implementation. Our vision, and the mission we believe will evolve, has and will continue as a goal for our students and their successes, a guide for new teacher supports and a steadfast roadmap for our veteran teachers, a guideline for professional learning structures, a model for systems implementation and a foundation for collaborative partnerships. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Walter H. Crowley School of Leadership at I.S 5 currently has 1814 students on register. Our diverse student population is composed of 13.9% students with disabilities (8.6% of students are ICT/ 5.3% are SC) and 16.7% current English Language Learners (7.6% Former ENL - totalling 24.3% ENL). The predominant home languages are Spanish and Chinese, 44% and 14.6% respectively with a growing Bengali population (10.9%). The remainder of our student population reflects the very diverse Elmhurst community, represented by over 31 countries of origin, with approximately 82.7% of our families speaking languages other than English at home. In the 2016-2017 school year, 76.8% of our current students had 95% attendance or better for the 2015-2016 school year, and in 2016-2017, 77.7% of our students had 95% attedance or better (17.7% at 100 percent attendance for the 2016-2017 school year) and our current year-to-date attendance percentage is 97.4%. Although the NYS ELA and Math scores show better than city average achievement (IS 5 currently has 48.6% students at or above proficiency on the 2016-2017 NYS Math Exam & 44.7% of students scoring at or above proficiency on the 2016-2017 NYS ELA exam), we still have much work to do to build well rounded, thoughtful, persistent and confident young ladies and men. We believe our evolving CEP goals, paired with the informed decisions we make as leaders, collaborative teams, partnerships with fellow learning organizations and powerful systems for supporting pedagogues, reflect a deepening focus on a student’s holistic experience and growth at IS 5. In order to prepare our students to meet the rigorous expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards while ensuring all teachers have the tools and real-time assessment data necessary for rich and responsive pedagogy, our teachers had been working in grade level teams with Teaching/Assessment Matters and MasteryConnect in 20176-2017. With the guidance and coaching of Teaching/Assessment Matters, teachers in the content areas have explored the MasteryConnect tool as the vehicle for data-driven conversations, engaging in protocols to surface student strengths and gaps, approaches to assessment creation and revision, and zoning in on student growth over time in key standards. In the 2017-2018 school year, this good work continues with an emphasis on streamlining, leveraging agendas to maximize time, building teacher leadership and empowerment, and intervisitations to begin to make our work "public." Our work grows to embrace the power of sharing practice and connecting our data-driven conversations to curriculum adjustment to formative assessment in real time classroom activities and supports. In turn, our goal is for students to be provided instruction that is CCLS connected and instruction that pinpoints needs areas for positive student outcomes. At its finest, this initiative has our teachers engaging in dialogue around student performance and curriculum that is transformative, inquiry based and fosters the change agent of collaboration in routine and healthy ways. Ultimately, this work sharpens their instructional, professional and leadership skill set with our students standing to benefit. In 2016-2017, I.S 5 has had an opportunity to be a Partner School in the Chancellor’s signature Learning Partners Program for a fourth and final year. In the 2015-2016 school year, we are one of five schools that were matched with Middle School 88 through Learning Partners Plus. In 2016-2017, we continued in this collaborative structure, deepening the work together with our teacher teams, Integrated Project Work, MasteryConnect, and our exploration of adult learning research to guide teacher team constructs. The initial initiative birthed from our partnership has been the implementation of Integrated Project Work which continues to afford our students an opportunity to partake in project based learning. Through our visits with our host school, and under the tutelage of Principal Ailene 2018-19 CEP 10  Mitchell and her teacher teams, IPW continues to provide an authentic opportunity for teacher collaboration through project based learning that was aligned to CCLS, enhanced student achievement in 21 st century skills, showcased leadership capabilities of student and staff alike, and targeted student engagement and the cognitive challenge of Danielson 3C. As we continue to implement IPW as a staple of the IS 5 pacing and curriculum, we continue to refine our approach and expectations as well, through feedback cycles and committee conversations. For example, while IPW has the added benefit of an increase in teacher collaboration across subject areas and community building, it was apparent that there were varied levels of teacher understanding of student-driven PBL and how to successfully implement student-led projects. Therefore, in the 2016-2017 school year, we had teachers attending professional learning given by the BFSC Instructional Leads to turnkey a Monday Professional Learning Session to ensure consistency of message and strong foundations. The result had our IPW truly student led, with less teacher voice and more student accountability, thoughtful planning and meaningful outcomes. In the 2017-2018 school year, I.S. 5 is now a Learning Partners Host School. Rooted in the vision for student engagement through project based learning, Bronx Writing Academy, I.S. 96 Seth Low and I.S. 392 have come on the journey with us. Through three concrete Cycles of Inquiry (C.o.I.) and twelve school visits and showcases, our team seeks to support the understanding and professional growth around design thinking and PBL by examining the conditions for learning that must exist for successful and sustainable PBL approaches and outcomes to occur. We believe that through the host experience, we, too, will learn pedagogy and leadership moves to strengthen the instructional core and are excited to have I.S. 5 staff be given the opportunity to visit our partner schools to see firsthand other learning environments. We believe that LP is a catalyst for change that does not solely reside with the partner schools - LP is a priceless opportunity to simultaneously challenge ourselves and to grow. In order to develop leadership in our staff, we have grown our Model Teacher work through the support of LPP. Our Model Teachers have continued to work closely with a cadre of new teacher hires around effective teaching strategies, the work of intervisitations, looking at student work protocols and using formative data to drive planning and instruction. We are proud to have a Model Teacher group from different subject areas, years of experience and diverse perspectives on pedagogy that fuels our work with our LPP point, Ms. Zosia Skorko. In the 2017-2018 school year, we have four Model Teachers, two of whom are focused on mentoring our newest teachers in cycles of meetings and intervisitation/feedback sessions, and two of whom are embedded in the work of student empowerment and engagement as model rooms to showcase for our teachers, new and veteran (focused on Socratic Seminar/PBL and alignment of school vision to student voice and ownership). Our Model Teachers meet bi-weekly to engage in Cycle of Inquiry work in areas of focus that mirrors the Cycle of Inquiry focus of our LP Quad in the 2017-2018 school year. Our belief is that this direct connection to Model Teacher support will yield great benefit for new hires and, consequently, will influence positive academic outcomes for their students. In the 2016-2017 school year, we have increased our student’s experience with foreign language and culture by offering foreign language classes beyond our scope and sequence for our grade seven and eight honors classes. The addition of another Spanish Foreign Language teacher has begun the work of spiraling the academic experience in Spanish for select grade six classes, thus preparing students for exams on the eighth grade level. The Foreign Language department has received training in the curriculum Autentico and are working to embed its high leverage learning areas into their practice. In addition, the team seeks to align in looking at student work through the selection and application of benchmark, aligned assessments. 2018-19 CEP 11  Through our partnership with GoogleApps for Education, all teachers have been trained in GoogleClassroom and all students have received accounts. A number of teachers on staff have used this platform as a communication piece for their classes, as an approachable and easily navigable application for posting assignments and reminders, as well as directly connect with students inside and outside the classroom. In teh 2017-2018 school year, this system and structure has grown to impact full department teams as a hub for meeting agendas and planning, Learning Partner sharing, curriculum modifications and scaffold shares. In addition, teacher teams such as LPP Model Teachers, Departments and Student Clubs have used GoogleClassroom to post and house agendas, ask questions and upload important documents for students to own their information and next steps. Pairing this application with our continuous use of Skedula/PupilPath, a platform to show grades, assignments and communication for students and parents alike. Both applications have truly become part of the common language of our school community. Our work with The Leader in Me is in its second year. All students are immersed in a school environment rich in leadership culture and have the opportunity to find their voice through participation in an emerging Student Lighthouse Team. Currently, our student government comprised of a Community President (new this year) meets on a weekly basis to give voice to student concerns and provide a forum for student-led initiatives. In addition, we are working toward creating a Parent Lighthouse, who will study Leader in Me through monthly meetings with Principal Nepogoda (“Coffee and Conversation”). We believe that, by triangulating teachers, students and parents as Lighthouse Teams, Based on the outcomes fo the School Survey and to merge the work of LIM in a new and meaningful way, IS 5 is implementing Layers of Student Support this school year. Grade 6 students will receive advisory rooted in the Seven Habits. Grade 7 will receive College Access for All. Grade 8 will receive 21st Century Research and Media. All three supports will be given dedicated time in the student schedule and will focus on building the confidence, persistence and knowledge of students in their long term school and career goals. In the 2016-2017 school year, IS 5 had over 25 before and afterschool clubs, ranging from Anime to Spanish Club, Soccer to Baking. We seek to cultivate our outside partnerships with the following groups to further enrich the student experience and enhance the collaborative culture of the I.S. 5 community at large: NYSci – New York Hall of Science Edible Schoolyard NY Historical Society Cookshop Urban Advantage National Junior Honor Society Street Soccer USA Animal Rescue Club NY Young Runners Debate League CHAMPS (Girls Volleyball and Basketball) Adelphi University Christodora/Manice Trip for Grade 6 Students GoogleClassroom Grow NYC MTI/Schubert/Broadway Junior Sunnyside Beacon (CBO) 2018-19 CEP 12  Unfortunately, due to the unprecedented constraints on our budget in the 2017-2018 school year, the aforementioned clubs and organizations are pending volunteers from our staff to ensure they continue. As the year progresses, additional information will be added to specifically name those that are in place this school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our diverse school includes 13.9% Special Education students and a total of 24.3% English Language Learners (which includes Former ELLs still receiving two years of continued services). Currently, we have a growing Students in Temporary Housing population that is over 50 students (if including doubled up). Our Special Education students are struggling in their articulation of their thinking, both in in-class discussions and in their writing across subject areas. While the concepts taught are complex and thought-provoking, our SWD population needs scaffolds to express their ideas and sentence starters to communicate and keep focused in conversations. For our ENL students, their areas of need are similar - however, it seems they need the confidence to embrace their speaking, listening, reading and writing to be active participants in class and in their learning. Our ENL students need support in understanding complex text sets, as well as using sophisticated, academic language in their conversations and writing. Lastly, our STH students need additional targeted check ins by our guidance and community teams, as well as support via communications with their residences, attendance teacher and case workers. Our STH students also receive support via items needed for academic and personal success. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas of significant growth in the Framework for Great Schools are as follows: Collaborative Teachers: 4.15 in 2015-2016 to 4.30 in 2016-2017 Trust: 3.6 in 2015-2016 to 3.76 in 2016-2017 Effective School Leadership: 3.52 in 2015-2016 to 3.64 in 2016-2017 The key areas of focus are as follows: Supportive Environment - specifically in peer to peer support and personalized attention and support from staff to student. Parental Involvement - specifically in bringing to life classroom visits and becoming more of a presence in the school building as a community hub. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q005 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1798 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 107 103 14 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 51 10 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 75.0% % Reduced Lunch 16.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 51.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.02 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 150 143 5 96.2% 2.7% 17.0% 1.6% 43.7% 0.9% 8 33% 7.9 49.7% 72% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to District 24 data for our ENL students, NYS Assessment scores for ELA and Math have hit a plateau or declined over the 2015-2016 school year. Our ENL students are not only struggling to integrate themselves into our learning environments and succeed in the hopes of middle and future high school success, but they are also struggling just to meet proficiency, with only 4% of ENL students Meeting Standards in Math and 5% of ENL students Meeting Standards in ELA. To unify our D24 schools around a common goal for one of our most critical of student groups, we find ourselves connected through our ENL students and hope to move them forward to proficiency. As per the D24 Annual Goals for 2017-2018, they seek the following: By June 2018, District 24, in collaboration with the Borough Field Support Center, will improve the performance of all K-12 students in ELA, Science and Math, with a focus on ELL and SWD students, as measured by an increase on student performance on local assessments and standardized state exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will utilize daily multiple data sources (NYS Assessments, MasteryConnect pre, midpoint and post assessments, etc.) to engage in targeted small group instruction and diverse scaffolds aligned to the Next Generation Standards as evidenced by an increase of ….in NYS outcomes…with particular emphasis on SWD and ENL subgroups. Students in Grade 6 and Grade 7 will also use this data to create goals to drive their learning and prepare for Student Led Conferences. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide targeted professional development on the building of academic language in each of the core subject areas using the strategies presented by Queens North Instructional Support/Coaches September 2018- June 2019 ENL/ELA teachers and content area teachers of ENL Students Provide support for our new Bilingual Class (implementation via science and HLA) through partnerships with BFSC and intervistations with partner schools Assistant Principal for ELA/ENL, Assistant Principal for ELA, teachers of ENL students (ENL service providers and content area teachers), Queens North Personnel Assistant Principal for ENL, ENL teachers and support through TeachingMatters Professional Development ENL teachers will use both the Bilingual Common Core Curriculum and New Language Progressions to ground their work and track student progress over time. Continue to provide additional online and differentiated mathematics approaches and activities through Go Math for our ENL students. Leverage the use of Go Math Spanish online resources Continue to provide English as a Second Language classes to parents of our ENL students as well as members of the IS 5 community at large. This will serve to provide a layer of additional support that will extend to the home, where parents and guardians can engage in English conversation as well as to better guide the assistance they provide their child. Provide prioritize individualized math support for students in Saturday Academy that focuses on the expectations of CCLS and writing in mathematics / Prioritize Saturday Academy in ELA-ENL for Newcomers to push their Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking Skills to proficiency ENL students September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal for Math and Math teachers Parents of ENL Students; Neighborhood Constituents September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 ENL students who scored a Level 1 and 2 on the 2016 Math State Exam / Newcomer ENL Students Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator and Language Teacher (provided through the city) Assistant Principal for Math and Math teachers / Assistant Principal for ENL Department 2018-19 CEP 16 Support parents of ENL students by providing the following opportunities: Parents and Guardians of ENL students September 2018 - June 2019  Orientation meetings  Support meetings for the High School application process  Testing information nights  Parent workshops in conjunction with Western Queens Counseling School based translation of documents and large group meetings School Leadership Team and Parent Association Mtgs   Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, CBO (Beacon) and other qualified school personnel 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Support parents of ENL students by providing the following opportunities: Support meetings for the High School application process  Orientation meetings   Testing information nights  Parent workshops in conjunction with Western Queens Counseling    Work with Parent Coordinator, Clara LAonso, to provide Open Houses, Targeted ENL Workshops School based translation of documents and large group meetings School Leadership Team and Parent Association Mtgs Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Development sessions on ENL strategies provided by Queens North Personnel to support the application of ENL instructional strategies in all classrooms. Sessions will be provided for all ELA, ENL and content area teachers of ELLs as well as new teachers.  TeachingMatters professional learning opportunities will take place across 30 instructional days, with on site support to align assessments to the Bilingual Core Curriculum and New Language Progressions.  Saturday Academy will provide additional support in the key areas for proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam and focused math support that aligns to CCLS, specifically in writing to prove and defend mathematical process and thinking.  Go Math additional online resources will be allocated to target ENL students with emphasis on access to the home language  ELA/ENL, Math and other content teachers will be involved in weekly common planning meetings that are data driven through MasteryConnect, and in before school and after school curriculum development teams. 2018-19 CEP 17   Scheduled meetings to plan for parent support opportunities with Beacon (CBO), our parent coordinator and other qualified school personnel. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, all teachers will show growth in ENL progress in key unit standards through measures on MasteryConnect and formative assessments provided by ENL teachers. For Math, ENL students will demonstrate progress in key unit standards through measures on Go Math assessments. Specifically, by Feb 2018, all ENL students will have two assessments for ELA and Math that demonstrate progress from pre to post by 15 point gains. Midway Benchmark (February) 2017: In Math: Overall, from Nov 2016 2.35% at Mastery in Standards of Focus to March 2017 7.05% at Mastery in Standards of Focus. Grade Six reflects growth from 1.64% at Mastery outcomes in Nov 2016 to 4.05% at Mastery outcomes. Grade Seven reflects growth from 6.29% at Mastery outcomes to 11.17% at Mastery outcomes. Grade Eight reflects growth from 2.05% at Mastery outcomes in Nov 2016 to 16.94% at Mastery outcomes. In ELA 2017: Overall, from Nov 2016 5.79% at Mastery in Standards of Focus to March 2017 10.78% at Mastery in Standards of Focus. Grade Six reflects growth from 3.62% at Mastery outcomes to 6.88% at Mastery outcomes. Grade Seven reflects growth from 6.82% at Mastery to 13.35% at Mastery outcomes. Grade Eight reflects growth from 6.52% at Mastery outcomes to 11.87% at Mastery. We believe that, based on the diligence of teacher and collaborative team decision making around student progress data as well as a keen awareness of strength and focus areas by students, ELL instructional approaches will be employed to directly impact their understanding and assessment performance. For 2017-2018: By February 2018, all teachers will show growth in ENL progress in key unit standards through measures on MasteryConnect. All ENL students will have two assessments for ELA and Math that demonstrate progress from pre to post by 25 point gains in key standards. In addition, 3B Danielson will show progress in teacher implementation of 2018-19 CEP 18  higher order thinking questions and student to student discussion structures as evidenced by effective and highly effective overall outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) MasteryConnect, Go Math Assessments and Danielson (Advance) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the most recent Learning Environment Survey, only 75% of participants responded positively about questions regarding a supportive environment. Student Lighthouse teams will build capacity within the school community by finding their voice and engaging all stakeholders in supporting their leadership roles and responsibilities. By empowering students through the Lighthouse Team construct, we believe that this will build strong and healthy relationships between student and teacher (also directly in response to 47% of students who feel teachers are not responsive to their emotional struggles) as well as creating a legacy for student participation in schoolwide decisions and future student leaders. In addition, based on teacher and dean feedback regarding safe passage and behavior in the hallways, teachers who share a common group of classes have been programmed to be in close proximity to their teaching counterparts. This not only provides a system for safety in the halls, but also has core locations for the new Communities that have been established as an outcome of the 2015-2016 Lighthouse Team Work. An added benefit of this shift has been the deeper connections between teacher and student, with conversations being student and family centered. Through the Leader in Me and Integrated Project Work, Communities will come to be unified around the school vision, while also unique in partnerships and legacy in the years to come. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers and students will build stronger connections and relationships across the school community through the use of restorative practices, growth mindset shifts, Leader in Me core principles, mindfulness practices and celebrations of the beauty of our diversity through advisory structures during allocated classroom and homeroom time resulting in an increase of Highly Effective outcomes in Domain 2-2A from 35.76% HE to 50% HE and an increase of teacher-led school initiatives/events for I.S. 5 staff and, for students, positive outcomes of Appreciative Inquiry protocols beginning, mid and end of year as well as a decrease in recidivism in student related OORS incidents by half, ensuring that our students and staff feel safe, valued and are comfortable taking intellectual risks. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to provide training for all staff on the core Seven Habits of Effective People (7 Habits Signature in Leader in Me) to continue to make universal the core beliefs and language of Leader In Me to benefit the student community at large (school secretaries, school aides, support staff, etc). Our goal is full training for all staff by end of 2018 SY. Deans, guidance counselors, teachers and support staff November 2018 - June 2019 All IS 5 Teaching and Support Staff Providing Leader in Me Year Two Implementation Training for teaching staff in The Four Disciplines of Execution, with an emphasis on Alignment of Academics and the empowerment of staff to create their own WIGS (Wildly Important Goals) and, concurrently, engage students in the creation and tracking of their own goals by end of 2018 SY. Elect Community Student representatives from Community (Scholars, Experts, Innovators, Leaders) to participate in weekly Student Government meetings - and in direct training for student lighthouse by partner Leader in Me schools- giving voice to student concerns, student-led initiatives and shared responsibility for the Leader in Me work with students. Engage student groups in Leader in Me focused Layers of Student Support (once a week for targeted classes on the sixth, seventh and eighth grade levels) as well as Auditorium periods to clarify school expectations, rules and regulations with overall student growth and success in mind in Community Auditorium periods with Community Deans. The focus of the Layers of Student Support are advisry on grade six, CA4All for grade seven and 21st Century research and media for grade eight. The focus of Auditorium meetings (with four classes in a Community present at maximum) is to provide students the skills they need to have both private and public victories. All IS 5 teachers and students November 2018 & June 2019 Community Assistant Principals, Deans, Guidance, Teachers November 2018 - June 2019 Community Assistant Principals, Student Lighthouse Members Sept 2018 - June 2019 Community Assistant Principals, SAVE Room Teacher, Community Teams Lighthouse Teacher moderator, Assistant Principals, Teachers, student representatives Guidance counselors, Academy Teams, Pupil Personnel Team, Teachers Provide additional socio-emotional supports for all students so they can focus their energy and sights on their WIGS (Wildly Important Goals). Specifically, IS 5 will continue the work of peer mediation, growing restorative circle work, an emphasis on conversation and de-escalation by Community Teams. Is 5 will also work with the outcomes of the School Mental Health Teacher moderator, Assistant Principals, Teachers, IS 5 students Sept 2018– June 2019 Community Assistant Principals, Peer Mediation Teacher Liaisons, New York City Commission on Human Rights, 2018-19 CEP 21 and Wellness Grant to provide the supports necessary in a tiered approach to our school community. Continue a focus on disaggregating attendance, lateness and suspension data to surface students of concern to discuss during both BRT and PPT meetings Community Teams, PPT Team Sept 2018-June 2019 Western Queens, Teachers PPT Team, BRT Team, Community Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Support parents and families in Supportive Environment Items as follows: Support meetings for the High School application process   Training around College Access for All (Grade 7)  Parent workshops in conjunction with Western Queens Counseling     Coffee and Conversation Meeting with Principal Nepogoda (to broaden the work of LIM and support families)  Work with Parent Coordinator, Clara Alonso, to provide Open Houses, Targeted ENL Workshops School based translation of documents and large group meetings School Leadership Team and Parent Association Mtgs School Mental Health and Wellness Parent Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development on socio-emotional learning for guidance counselors and deans Full staff training in The Leader in Me, with the creation of the IS 5 Lighthouse Team and Student Lighthouse Team to lead the work for all stakeholders in the school community. Planning time for weekly auditorium/guest speaker period meetings Protocols for developing a shared action plan for students struggling with behavior and time and attendance issues Time for shared development of a ladder of referral and collaborative discussions on student needs in BRT & PPT Weekly Student Lighthouse meetings Time during the school day for peer mediation, restorative circles an Lighthouse Team work to designate trainer volunteers to work with a Parent Study Group (in the hopes of establishing a Parent Lighthouse Team for the 2018-2019 school year). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2017, Guest Speaker/Community Auditorium participants will show a decline in attendance/lateness concerns. By the close of the Aligning Academics training (November 2016), all participants will have a personal/professional Wildly Important Goal for focus through this school year. In addition, by February 2017 students will create their own goal and be able to articulate the goal to their parent/guardian at Winter Parent Teacher Conferences. Midway Benchmark (February): All Homeroom Classes elected a Class President by November 2016, and in January, Community Grade Level Presidents have been announced and are evolving into our Student Lighthouse. All Student Homeroom Classes created their W.I.G.s (a mix of cultural, behavioral and academic) in December 2016 and are tracking student progress on a daily basis. Leadership notebooks/portfolios are being piloted in over a dozen classes across grades in anticipation of 2017-2018 goals for Leader in Me. The IS 5 Lighthouse has met in January and opening of February to discuss systems and structures for sharing and celebrating W.I.G. successes. The impact on attendance has been a shift of 97.5% in September 2016 to 96.57% in December 2016. The impact on suspension has been a shift of a total of 12 suspensions in September 2016 to 21 suspensions in February 2017. The impact on student participation in extracurricular activities has static and has not grown from the 33 (not including sports) clubs from the opening of the school year. For 2017-2018: By February 2018, participants in Layers of Student Support will show a decrease in attendance/lateness concerns. B y February 2018, WIGS will be established as follows: Grade 6 Connected to Student Led Conferences / Grade 7: CA4All Goal and GRade 8: HS and CCR goal based on Library supports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff and Student Wildly Important Goals and Tracking of Progress / Attendance and Lateness Reports on ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the feedback on the most recent Quality Review, IS 5 teachers rate “Excellent” in “How well do teachers work with each other?” However, the feedback from the School Survey in 2015-2016 reflects a different perspective, one which we have decided is critical and requires our collective focus on teacher teaming and collaborative work:  72% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school (which is 14% lower than the city average)  78% of teachers say that they feel responsible that all students learn (which is 6% lower than the city average)  73% of teachers say that curriculum and instruction are well coordinated across different grade levels (9% lower than city average)  70% of students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work. In 2016-2017 School Survey, this section received the highest rating of all Framework elements, outperforming the district. Of special note regarding "Collaborative Teachers" on our work are the following: In order to provide opportunities to our teacher teams around curriculum, instruction and assessment for meaningful and impactful collaborative work, department and grade level specific teacher teams meet once a week as part of their work assignment to engage in Cycles of Inquiry around data from MasteryConnect and a focus on backward design. We believe that this approach will not only remedy the disconnect between city average and teacher feedback, but will, in turn, have students engaged in rigorous units of study with positive work outcomes. In addition, to build on the Cycles of Inquiry work of last year, Teaching Matters will provide 16 days of coaching to build teacher capacity and leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher teams will participate in collaborative lesson design and intervistiation as part of the structure of subject area inquiry cycles three times during the school year, resulting in increased teacher trust on the NYC DOE School survey (From 3.50 to 3.75 in Framework Element Scores overall and a shift from 73% to 85% in “Teachers say 2018-19 CEP 24  that they trust each other”), and the spread of new instructional practices across subject areas seen in observation and professional learning opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers in the content areas (Math, ELA, SS and Sci) along with their subject Assistant Principals will be trained over 15 days of on site coaching through TeachingMatters around the inquiry process, data driven decision making and formative assessment practices and to build teacher leadership and meeting facilitation. In addition, TM will begin the conversation of how departments track revisions and their impact on student learning over time. Model Teachers (three total this school year) will help to lead the Cycle of Inquiry work through their focus on caseloads of new teacher mentees. With the assistance and coaching of our LPP (Learning Partners) facilitator, the model teacher team will travel through three CoLs across the year that mirror the work of our partner schools (student engagement and needs in instructional environments to push authentic design thinking and PBL) and make this work transparent to new hires as a thinking process to guide their pedagogy. Assistant Principals will support their department teams in the work of MasteryConnect and delving into a deep understanding of CCLS and standards based instruction across the school year. MasteryConnect leads will engage in both small group support with TeachingMatters as well as attending inquiry team trainings at off site professional development sessions. The core MasteryConnect Team (four teachers across the core subject areas) will serve as a system for communication, collaboration and conenction to the administrative staff and will participate in bi-monthly meetings to discuss the work and next steps. These leads will play an interactive role in weekly department, grade level specific inquiry meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018 - June 2019 ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies teachers, Assistant Principals, TeachingMatters coach Nick Seiward Sept 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, LPP Facilitator ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies teachers, Assistant Principals Model Teachers, LPP Facilitator, New Teaching Hires Sept 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals and MasteryConnect leads Content Area teachers, Assistant Principals, TeachingMatters support personnel How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  Support parents and families in understanding MasteryConnect, Teacher Teaming and Collaboration through the Items as follows:  Parent workshops in conjunction with Teaching Matters  School based translation of documents and mailings regarding assessment to support student areas of growth and areas of challenge School Leadership Team and Parent Association Mtgs   Coffee and Conversation Meeting with Principal Nepogoda (to message the importance of the platform and teacher collaboration in their child's work and progress)  Encourage teachers and students to reference the MasteryConnect platform during PTC to navigate conversations around areas of strength and areas of need Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Model Teachers (4) who will be working with New Teacher hires, using funding sources provided through Learning Partners as well as FSF - MasteryConnect online platform funded through Title I monies by student license - TeachingMatters funded half through grant funding/other funded through Title I monies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers in the core content areas (ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies) will have Mastery Connect data for two assessments entered, reviewed and discussed/implemented as data for driving instruction and assessment design. Midway Benchmark (February): The following content areas are involved in the work of Cycles of Inquiry through the use of the MasteryConnect tool and TeachingMatters supports (status of the work included): English Language Arts: Teacher Teams have used data from MasteryConnect to target skills to support standards of focus to create a common lesson design to perform and study results returning from mid-winter break. In addition, assessments have been revised and collaborative conversations around instructional approaches have taken place from the outcomes of continued struggles with the same power standards. The impact of this work has shown: December 9.65% Mastery in Power Standards to February 15.26% Mastery in Power Standards. 2018-19 CEP 27  Mathematics: Teacher Teams have analyzed student data in determining making changes to the pacing of the curriculum. Through the lens of the Item Skills Analysis, teacher teams have learned to collaborate about best practices within specific lessons. The impact of this work has shown: December 7.07% Mastery in Power Standards to 13.23% Mastery in Power Standards. Social Studies: Teacher Teams have already completed a Cycle of Inquiry around Cause and Effect and are currently reviewing data to push into the second Cycle of Inquiry. The impact of this work has shown: December 13.58% Mastery in Power Standards to 16.75% in Mastery in Power Standards Science: Teacher Teams have utilized the data to drive revisions on assessment through the lens of Item Skills Analysis protocols. In addition, the teacher teams in science have utilized the Strengths and Gaps protocol to surface areas of need. The impact of this work has shown: Mastery of Standards Assessed: 71.5%. ENL: The ENL Teacher Team have reviewed the outcomes of the ENL Baseline Assessment (modeled after the updated NYSESLAT Exam) to surface areas of need (which are aligned to the ELA areas of need thus aligning their supports and targeted small group instruction in the ELA classroom). The ENL Teacher Team will be digging in to EDAT data to pair with MasteryConnect to build a common vision from multiple data sources. By February 2019, all teacher teams in the core subjects (ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies) will have completed a Cycle of Inquiry, with evidence of data driven decisions, curricula shifts and student work products to demonstrate impact and growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment of the Inquiry Process and Mastery Connect Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Current data on 3C: Student Engagement, teacher feedback and our most recent QR, there is a need for teachers to collaboratively research and refine the use of strategies to push students to develop higher-order critical thinking and problem solving skills across all subjects, with an attention to multiple entry points to engage all learners. While our 2013-14 QR had stated that: “As observed in classrooms visited, questions are designed to engage students in thinking, but only a few students are consistently involved. Furthermore, although teams design unit questions aligned to the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) matrix, in order to push students’ thinking, most questions asked by classroom teachers follow a single path of inquiry rather than challenging students to justify their thinking. As a result, pedagogical strategies and student work products do not consistently produce high levels of student thinking demonstrating uneven practice, predictable learning experiences and lack of student autonomy through facilitation of instruction”, our most Recent QR supported the need to continue to create the platforms and systems necessary to foster student-centered learning practices such as Project Based learning. Such instructional practices offer all students access to rigorous skills and practices in a relevant context. Our review of data points (Quality Review feedback as well as 3c outcomes in observations, paired with School Survey about communication of high expectations/challenge and clarity of vision) shows this is a continued need. We believe the Community work around a unified approach to rigor messaged during this time as well as building a common mission for how we bring the school vision to life will help to push academic press and shared responsibility for all stakeholders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, I.S. 5 leadership will provide opportunities for staff and team training in systems and supports that align with the school vision, participate routinely in connection and relationship building activities with classes and staff, and conduct vision and action clarification reviews in department, common planning meetings and correspondence resulting in deeper development and understanding of the “why” behind our collective school mission as measured by an increase in school level survey outcomes (Specifically, “I clearly see the connection between what we do as teachers, the expectations of students and the school vision” growing from 44.2% yes to 69.2% yes) and NYC DOE survey outcomes (Specifically, “Teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working” growing from 62% to 87% positive). 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to focus on the goal of parents will being invited to learn the importance of student engagement, our school vision and Project Based Learning for their child's academic success and leadership development through sessions offered during Parent Engagement Time, beginning in January 2019. Not only will parents and guardians have the opportunity to see the school vision and mission in action, but they will also be able to hear from students about the power of being engaged, student ownership of learning and the impact on their work products. Participating parents/guardians will be invited to Integrated Project Week 2019 to see this work in action and will be asked for feedback. In Community Teams, teachers and support staff will meet following each Professional Learning Monday cycle (approximately five times minimum across the school year) to delve into IS 5 mission creation, its alignment to high expectations and positive environment and student socio-emotional needs and next steps. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers who volunteer across content areas/Parent Coordinator/Parents/Student leds January 2019 - June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Paraprofessionals October 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Professional Development Committee, Integrated Project Week Coordinator, Learning Partners Committee, Teachers Assistant Principals, Teachers, Professional Learning Committee, Paraprofessionals, Community Team Support How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Support parents and families in understanding the importance of Community Meetings, the School Vision and Mission and Decisions made at the Community Level :  Parent workshops 2018-19 CEP 30   School based translation of documents and mailings regarding assessment to support student areas of growth and areas of challenge School Leadership Team and Parent Association Mtgs   Coffee and Conversation Meeting with Principal Nepogoda  Parent engagement time as follow up for the outcomes of Community Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Development sessions to support student socio-emoitional support and wellness so that teachers and staff are in tune with our students' needs and strengths.  Professional readings on mission and vision building  Guest speakers and interschool visitations to see systems and structures for communication of high expectations and positive environment  Materials and other resources specific to community team projects. Coverage for teachers to attend workshops through Queens North Teaching and Learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2017, over 50% of the teaching staff will have participated in a PBL opportunity and all staff will have participated in a survey and feedback session regarding implementation, participation and collaboration in preparation for the last grade to present (refinements to the process stemming from survey responses and feedback by administration anticipated). Midway Benchmark (In February): IS 5 sent six teachers across subject areas and roles to participate in a Project Based Learning series (offered through the Queens Field Support Center – Teaching and Learning). These teachers now serve as the committee for IPW planning for the duration of the school year. All teachers will experience three sessions of professional learning and turnkey beginning on February 27, with the culminating goal being the formulation of Integrated Project Work teams. Planning and preparation windows will extend across the March-May months. The three sessions for Professional Learning will be titled as follows: Session One: Introduction to Project Based Learning at IS 5 2018-19 CEP 31  Session Two: Instructional Approaches to Support PBL Session Three: Planning and Preparation Structures to Support Kickoff By February 2018, all IS 5 Communities will have met three times. Through this work, student movement and further supports should be put in place so they are in their best learning environment for success. In addition, an IS 5 Vision and Mission will be in draft form, moving into mapping the practices necessary to bring both to life each day (i.e., academic discussion strategies, vision for rigor in planning and instruction, etc.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBL BIE Rubric - 21 Century Skills / Engage NY Tri-State Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based in the 2015-2016 Learning Environment Survey, 81% of our parents responded positively to questions about building strong Family Community Ties. As a school community we have continued to build this capacity by networking with community establishments to visit the school during events, such as Parent Teacher meetings, PA meetings, family nights and our guest speaker series. These partnerships have extended invitations for parents to visit with families to explore the opportunities they offer. (An example of this is the partnership with the NY Hall of Science) These partnerships allow for a unified relationship between families and school to assist in supporting student achievement. In 2016-2017, parent feedback on the School Survey only accounted for half of the parent population (55%) and parents/families communicated a need for our school to be more communicative and encourage volunteering and parent presence in the school. In the 2017-2018 School survey, parent feedback accounted for 58% of the parent population, 60 % of the parents feel that staff regularly communicates with them about their child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all parents and families will have the opportunity to participate in three I.S. 5 events with specific emphasis on open school classroom visits in the Fall, Winter and Spring seasons resulting in an increase from 58% in 2017-2018 to 61% in 2018-2019 in parental involvement shown on the NYC School Survey and in attendance at monthly parent association meetings. We will focus on demystifying instruction for our families and parents to bring them in as partners in education through open school weeks, that will invite families to engage in classroom instruction and activities to build clear understanding of learning expectations and outcomes. As a school community, we will build content specific learning syllabus’, offered in multiple languages that can be provided to familiarize families of the academic expectations. In continuing to support family and community ties, we will build alumni connections that will offer opportunities to speak with students about their futures in high school and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 33 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to have each Community/Content Area will build partnerships that are unique to their mission and to their subject. These partnerships will be academic and experiential in nature (i.e. Billion Oyster Project) and will culminate with a share of learning and leadership to parents by the end of the school year. Collaborate with community based organizations, SLT, and the PA to develop seminar and workshop opportunities related to parent concerns. Specifically, through the collaboration of the principal and parent coordinator, the following topics will be explored: College and Career Readiness, High School Planning, LIM/Seven Habits and Goal Setting Increase communication regarding parent association meetings and other parent workshops (letters backpacked home, school messenger, school website, parent coordinator newsletter). Utilize school created survey data to plan for workshops and meetings to address parent concerns. Leverage College Access for All, Western Queens and other partnerships to connect with parents and follow through on our promise to live like leaders through our stewarding of their needs. Welcome families of incoming Grade 6 classes to a series of three Open Houses, one of which will include classroom visitations to see instruction and the learning environment. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and school stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 Parents and school stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, SLT Members, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association Board Members, CBOs. Assistant Principals, SLT Members, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association Board Members, CBOs. Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Parents Parents September 2018- June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Parents Assistant Principals, Community Teams November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. See Above... Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 34     Funding will be used in order to secure initial partnership agreements Funding will be used to support the continued use of School Messenger to report out to families upcoming events IS 5 website will serve as a communication piece to families and students of current work and upcoming events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 2 Parent Association Meetings will celebrate student leadership and voice. By February 2019, parent attendance will demonstrate an increase of 5% a month. By February 2019, at least two seminars from CBO will be offered. Midway Benchmark (February): The I.S. 5 school community currently has partnerships with the following: Hall of Science, New York Historical Society, Adelphi University, Edible School Yard, Urban Advantage, Street Soccer USA, Leader in Me, CookShop. In addition, in May , all staff members will facilitate student participation highlighting celebrations in student work in each content area. In 2018-2019: By February 2019, parents will have had three school events to attend that are geared toward "the end in mind" (C&C R, HS, etc.) . Parents will be invited to participate in College Access for All Presentations presented by NY Edge as well as from other outside COB that IS 5 is currently in partnership with. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Parent coordinator and Parent Association Signature Sheets for Meetings - Feedback forms for content area teachers to attempt to tie student performance to partnerships Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Small group time within the ELA/ESL classroom with differentiated texts, tasks and/or content ● Small groups (12 students or less) by grade level ● During the school day, embedded in classroom instruction ● During the school day / 1 45-minute periodweekly ● Small group (20 students) by grade level and/or English proficiency level ● Saturday ELL Academy 3-hour sessions (17 Saturdays for the 2017-2018 school year) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● All students will receive Tier 1 interventions within the ELA/ESL classroom Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Differentiated instruction in all ELA/ESL classes- Tier I Intervention ● Students with disabilities who are not meeting grade-level standards as per State assessments ● English Language Learners (entering) who are not meeting grade-level standards as per State assessments ● SWD and/or SWD/ELL students – Tier II Intervention provided by AcademicIntervention Teacher, and teacher-created tasks based on the ELA standards, NYS ELA exams (Grade 6 and Grade 8 Wilson Reading intervention). Students are assessed to track progress across the school year. ● Title III Saturday ELL Academy for targeted ELLs- 1.5 hr. of instruction in reading and writing through the content areas,and 1.5 hr of instruction through Math in preparation for the 2018-19 CEP 36  Mathematics NYSESLAT and NYS ELA assessments. ● Students are administered reading and writing assessments across the program in pre and post assessments. Differentiated instruction in all Math classes-Tier I intervention •In addition to Tier I intervention, identified students will receive Tier II intervention using scaffolded tasks based on student data as well as routine use of Khan Academy to target individual student need areas ● All students will receive Tier 1 interventions within the mathematics classroom ● Students with disabilities who are not meeting grade-level standards as per State assessments ● English Language Learners who are not meeting grade-level standards as per State assessments SWD and/or SWD/ELL students receive Tier II support through AIS Math twice a week Title III Saturday Academy also embraces Math Instruction to address the Tier II language literacy required for success on performance tasks and CCLS assessments. Differentiated instruction in all science classes- Tier I Intervention Science All students will receive Tier 1 interventions within the science classroom •Small group work time differentiated tasks and/or content •Small group setting During the school day •Additional 1-2 45 minute periods a week •Two weekdays after school (only offered through teacher volunteer basis due to budget constraints) Saturday ELL Academy 3-hour sessions (17 Saturdays for the 2017-2018 school year) Small group time within the science classroom with differentiated texts, During the school day, embedded in classroom instruction 2018-19 CEP 37  Social Studies Grade 8 Self Contained students receiveScience AIS All students will receive Tier 1 interventions within the science classroom At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) One period, once a week During the school day, embedded in classroom instruction During the school day for one or more periods a week as needed tasks, process and/or content Small group (SC Class) Small group time within the science classroom with differentiated texts, tasks, process and/or content One-on One meetings/mandates Small groups Group Guidance Sessions IEP/Triennial Meetings Instruction that zones in on the performance tasks necessary for NYSSCIsuccess Differentiated instruction in all science classes- Tier I Intervention School counselors will provide guidance and counseling services during the school day. One period a week or more if needed, to all students at risk. The service is offered in English and Spanish. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with personal and academic issues, including school, friends, family, organizational skills, time management and preparation for high school. The school psychologist will offer clinical services. They will observe at-risk students who are in possible need of an initial evaluation. In addition, the psychologist will observe and test all triennial students. The social worker will provide counseling 2018-19 CEP 38  services to at risk students during the school day for one or more periods a week as needed. Student will be assisted in dealing with family crisis, and various personal issues. In addition, the social worker will work with the families of students that are in need of their mandated three year reevaluation for Special Education service. Health related services are offered to all students as needed. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with health related issues. In addition, the school nurse works with students to educate them on the medicine that they are administered, good eating habits, and hygiene. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 68 Students - All Guidance staff will receive training from the STH point on the IS 5 Safety Plan/Consolidated Plan regarding McKinney-Vento Act and appropriate supports - Training for IS 5 staff, especially Community Teams, around STH needs through BFSC PLC's that are aligned with this goal - STH Funding will continue to provide items to support school success - book bags, notebooks, general supplies - as well as items for physical wellbeing and readiness (ex. general toiletries) - Parent coordinator outreach to surrounding shelters to invite parents and guardians to information and support sessions, with additional layers of socio-emotional and mental health components through Western Queens - As with all students, STH are provided access to Skedula/PupilPath to review their child's progress in reports and classwork. Paper copies are also sent home to ensure review if no access to technology. - GoogleClassroom is utilized as a means to access assignments and communicate with teachers and classmates - Leader in Me items to support the home-school connection such as student leadership journals and The Seven Habits of Effective Teens (in Multiple Languages) - Layers of Student Support via goal setting, HS preparation and College and Career Readiness Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. - Pupil personnel staff will work closely with Queens Borough Field Support Services point to ensure that all staff is highly qualified. - Mentors are assigned to support new teachers and teachers who require assistance. Model Teachers are charged with a caseload of new teacher mentees (four Model Teachers this school year). - Attend job fairs, recruit through NYCDOE programs and conduct extensive interviews, including an expectation to have future panel interviews that involves the perspectives of current teachers as well as a potential demonstration lesson and discussion of teacher team participation. - New teacher meetings with the principal help to support understanding of school mission, data, culture and expected student outcomes as they all relate to day to day pedagogy and long term planning and practice. - Monthly paraprofessional support meetings with Principal and Assistant Principal of Special Education to provide information and training on instructional initiatives and classroom approaches - High level of support provided from subject supervisors via targeted focus during weekly meetings and Monday afternoon professional learning sessions. Seasoned teaching personnel engage in informal intervisitation to support new teacher growth and reflection. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Utilizing professional development personnel at the citywide and district level, ensuring a train-the-trainer model for CCLS Mathematical Practices, ELA expectations across Content Areas, targeted special education professional learning opportunities around co-teaching models, IEP writing and implementation of multiple entry points, and sessions by youth and safety network personnel about working with and monitoring at-risk students. 2018-19 CEP 42  - Building capacity and teacher leadership through instructional cabinet that meets once a quarter throughout the school year with a focus on best practices, coherence of school mission across classrooms, school environment and collaboration on school initiatives across subject areas (IPW, Leader in Me, etc.). - Paraprofessionals sent to UFT Queens trainings, SESIS refreshers and participate in in-house professional learning opportunities around Talking Like a Scholar, Writing Like an Expert, Thinking Like an Innovator and Living Like Leaders. - Employ the use of certified and reputable professional developers at Queens North with professional development through Teaching Matters on cohesive teacher team building and inquiry structures through Learning Partners Plus. - Apply deeper understandings and logistical awareness regarding the Danielson Framework from our JESA meetings to team norming and observation practices. - Learning Partner visits immerse teacher and leadership participants in research-based, inquiry-driven professional learning around two essential focus areas (Strong Family-Community Ties and Effective School Leadership) several times across the 2016-2017 school year. - All staff will experience training in The Leader in Me, to build a common vision, language and goal around socio-emotional supports and student leadership at IS 5. The projected timeline for training and establishment of a Student Lighthouse Team is November 2016 and a Parent Lighthouse Team in January 2017.. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 43  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers conduct evaluations of the status of curriculum three times over the course of the year (Fall/Mid-Year/June). Additionally, teachers review the impact of pre and post assessments in planning meetings and professional learning committee meetings to surface the instructional multiple entry points necessary for all students to achieve the objectives of rigorous tasks. Based on the examination of student work and teacher feedback, decisions to shift the instructional core are made. Teacher teams also examine tasks and expectations through EngageNY, PARCC, MOSL and NYS exams to inform decisions on the assessment and backward-planning. For critical decisions around NYS Regents exams, the I.S. 5 School Leadership Team has been consulted to hear ideas and concerns from all school community stakeholders. To ensure that teachers effectively use assessment results to improve instruction and respond to student needs, professional development around Danielson Framework Domain 3 is embedded in the expectations of Monday afternoon professional learning work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Page 15, 19, 23, 27, 30 Page 15 Page 15, 19, 23, 27, 30 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 944,653 0 39,630 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 11,411,109 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 44  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Walter H. Crowley School of Leadership at I.S. 5, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Walter H. Crowley School of Leadership at I.S. 5 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Walter H. Crowley School of Leadership at I.S. 5, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 2018-19 CEP 49  support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 50  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Walter Crowley This school is (check one): DBN: 24Q005 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 180 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> Our English Language Learners receive Title III supplementary services through our ELL Saturday Academy. All ELLs and former ELLs in grades 6-8 are welcome to attend, however the program specifically targets our Newcomer students (Entering and Emerging Proficiency Level) as well as ELLs with a level 1 or 2 on their NYSELA exam. For the past two years, we have partnered with ArtsConnection to incorporate the theater arts into our Saturday Academy. Through this partnership, we have been able to build not only the reading and writing skills of our ELLs and ELL/SWDs, but also their listening and speaking skills and their self-esteem. This year, teachers who worked alongside the teaching artists will work in conjunction with the ENL/ELA staff to build in opportunities for speaking and listening through drama. The assistant principals of ELA and ENL supervise the Saturday program. They hire all staff members, organize the program, create the schedule, work with teachers to develop instructional materials, and supervise teachers and students. The assistant principals, in conjunction with the cooperating teachers, maintain accurate attendance records. Certified ENL and content-area teachers provide instruction in ENL, reading and writing through informational and literary texts, and speaking and listening. A minimum of 6 certified teachers, half of which will be certified ENL/Bilingual teachers will be hired for the program. Instruction and accompanying materials and activities are provided in English. However, students who are entitled to a bilingual setting as per their IEP are provided a language paraprofessional. Classes meet on Saturdays from November until May, from 9 AM to 12 PM. Saturday Academy is not in session during school breaks or holiday weekends. Group sizes are maintained at a maximum of twenty students. Groups are formed by grade level and/or proficiency level. Each group will rotate between three periods of instruction. Each period will be taught by a certified ELA/Social Studies/Science/Math teacher planning in conjunction with certified ENL instructors. Students receive sixty minutes of reading instruction, sixty minutes of writing instruction, and sixty minutes of listening and speaking through the theater arts. Instruction is provided by certified teachers using ELL strategies for deconstructing complex texts. These strategies are research-based and focus on deconstructing/reconstructing complex texts, building academic vocabulary, discussing text-dependent questions, and responding to academic writing tasks. These practices give ELLs an entry point to grade-level complex texts while building their proficiency in reading, writing, listening and speaking. In addition, texts and workbooks will be purchased to help supplement the changing scope of the NYSESLAT exam. Supplemental instructional materials such as Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT will be provided, as well as authentic texts (news articles, primary and secondary sources) and audio-visual supplemental materials (including, but not limited to Brain Pop and Teacher Tube). General instructional supplies including translation dictionaries, headsets, chart paper, markers, notebooks and pencils will be purchased to support the Saturday Academy. Texts and materials will be separate and distinct from materials utilized during the schol day. Home language support will be provided through the use of glossaries, multi-lingual word banks, translation via technological devices, and peer language grouping. In addition to the Saturday 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information program, ENL supplemental instruction will occur in an ENL/ELA afterschool program meeting Wednesdays and Thursdays with a focus on our Transitioning and Expanding English proficiency level (Developing ELLs) after school from 2:30-3:30 pm. The afterschool program will target transitioning and expanding ELLs, particularly our long-term ELL population. The ENL program will be staffed by 3 ENL-certified teachers who will utilize Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, authentic texts (New York Times, TIME magazine, historical sources) and other supplemental materials to provide instruction to ELLs who are unable to attend the Saturday Academy. Students will be grouped by grade level, with no more than 20 students in each group. In order to support our students in the classroom, our ENL and content area teacher will utilize team-teaching practices, flexible grouping based on data and student need and targeted individualized scaffolds that will support student progress. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> Part C: Professional Development This school year, teachers of English Language Learners, in conjunction with all teachers, will receive continued school-based professional development on out instructional vision: Talk like Scholars, Write like Experts, Think like Innovators and Live like Leaders. They will continue to develop strategies for student-led academic discussions as well as build a common language across content areas about academic writing. ENL teachers will be developing formative and summative assessments that will be entered into Mastery Connect. Teachers will be trained to use the data from these assessments to plan for small group instruction, individual conferences, and the tracking of progress in NYS standards over time. School-based professional learning will take place on Monday afternoon during the time designated by UFT contract. In addition, MasteryConnect training and support sessions will be held during the school day on a monthly basis. Attendance records will be maintained through teacher sign in sheets and meeting minutes will be attached to the Professional Development agendas. Through our partnership with Queens College School of Education, we will schedule training sessions with Jennifer Stengel-Mohr on the incorporation of language objectives into each lesson to target specific linguistic needs of our students. In addition to school-based professional learning opportunities, our ENL teachers and content area teachers of ELLs will continue to attend workshops provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support as well as the Queens North Field Support Center. Attendees will turnkey their training to their peers during Monday professional development meetings, common planning meetings, and scheduled conference days. Through these professional development opportunities, the progress of ELLs will be monitored regularly through the use of Mastery Connect, teachers will incorporate language objectives to equip students to meet linguistic demands of grade level curriculum, and teachers will utilize a "toolbox" of strategies to provide students access to complex texts. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> I.S. 5 believes parental involvement is essential to the success of all of our student, particularly ELLs. In order to improve the registration and identification process for newcomer students, our ELL coordinator is scheduled to be available first period each school day to welcome incoming parents, conduct the orientation, and meet with each new student and his family. In one of our Integrated Projects this school year, students developed the concept of a welcome committee for newcomer students. Our ELL coordinator will be working with these students to further develop a welcome system for our school- improving the orientation process for both students and parents, preparing school information in more languages, and assigning each new student a buddy who speaks his/her own language. The welcome committee will work in conjunction with the Assistant Principal of ENL and the ELL coordinator to schedule additional workshops for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator is a critical intermediary with our ELL parents. In conjunction with her office, ENL classes for parents will continue to be provided on a bi-weekly basis for parents who are learning English. She also published a monthly parent newsletter to inform parents of upcoming events in the school and share school celebrations. Monthly meetings held over the course of the school year such as school Family Nights, Skedula workshops and informational meetings facilitated by I.S. 5 staff serve as opportunities for parents of ELLs to share, discuss, and ask questions regarding their child’s progress and celebrate their successes. Additional meetings with parents of ELLs are scheduled as needed to address specific student needs and concerns. Attendance records will be maintained through teacher sign in sheets and meeting minutes will be attached to the Professional Development agendas. The school utilizes School Messenger as an effective intermediary between school and home. Parents receive a multilingual phone message regarding important school events, activities and other notifications. The I.S. 5 website contains a “Parent’s Corner” that has information on how parents can participate in the Parent Association and the school community. School correspondence is translated into as many native languages as possible through the use of school staff as well as the New York City Translation Unit. Our school has teachers, paraprofessionals and support staff that are fluent in Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, Bengali, Punjabi, Korean, and other languages. When a parents who speaks one of these languages calls or visits the school, we are able to communicate with them in the home language through these native speakers. For oral translation for a language that is not available, the school utilizes the Translation and Interpretation Unit. During school events, translators are hired to provide parents information and support in their native languages. All parents, including parents of our ELLs, receive access to individual student data and homework assignments through Skedula. Parent workshops and/or guest speakers are provided on a monthly basis in conjunction with our Parent Association around topics including fininacial health, emotional health of middle school students, how to help your child meet the demands of the common core, and others. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Walter H. Crowley School of Leadership Borough Queens School Number 005 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kelly Nepogoda Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Colao Teacher/Subject Area Maciej Taczynski, ENL/SS Teacher/Subject Area Linyu Fan, ENL/SS Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Maria Berrios Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Clara Alonso Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 6 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1828 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 287 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.70%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to assess the literacy skills of our students and provide a leveled reading experience, our school utilizes myON Reader. The students’ initial assessment provides a baseline for student Lexile level data, and students are then measured through regular benchmark assessments. MyON provides data on number and type of books read, time spent reading, and completion of book quizzes. Data is currently unavailable due to an upgrade in the program and delay in activating student accounts. In order to provide additional information about our students’ reading levels and comprehension, teachers will be implementing informal running records and utilizing teacher-created assessment results. Data gathered from these sources is utilized for instructional grouping in the ELA/ENL classroom, targeted small group instruction, and tracking of individual student growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL programming is measured through individual student growth on teacher-created formative and summative assessments and growth in proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. ENL and ELA teachers look for patterns and trends across assessment data and student work pieces to provide targeted instruction for our ELLs. When students participate in afterschool and/or Saturday Academy, progress is measured through pre and post-assessments and theater activities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Forty percent of our ELLs have been receiving services for three years or less. Twelve percent of Newcomer ELLs are also students with a disability. Forty-seven percent of ELLs fall in the developing (4-6 years of service) range and 51% of these are SWDs. Thirteen percent of ELLs are long-term ELLs receiving 7 or more years of service. Of those long-term ELLs, 70% are students with disabilities. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data reveal that 61% of our current ELLs are Expanding (Advanced), 11% are Transitioning (High Intermediate), 7% are Emerging (Low Intermediate) and 19% are Entering (Beginning). Our total Current ELL population is 287 students and our formerly entitled ELL (Commanding and Proficient) population is 225, totaling 512 students who require ENL services. Our current ELL population decreases with each grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. . I.S. 5 continues to provide rigorous standards-based instruction in a variety of learning environments by certified ENL teachers through our freestanding ENL program. Traditionally in our building, ENL services were provided through co-teaching in the ELA classroom. Currently, our ENL services are provided through several models. Three classes are self-contained, stand-alone ENL classes for Newcomers, one on each grade level. The ENL teachers teach both ELA and Social Studies grade-level content to our newcomer ELLs utilizing ENL strategies to provide multiple entry points to grade-level curriculum. These students are serviced a total of 14 periods a week. We have 5 ICT classes containing ELLs. These classes are a mix of proficiency levels. The ENL teachers collaborate and co-teach with the ELA ICT teacher teams. There are 7 self-contained special education classes containing ELLs of varying proficiency levels. The ENL teachers co-teach with the special education ELA teachers. There are five general education classes containing ELLs on the transitioning or expanding levels. These students receive services via the co-teaching model in ELA and/or social studies. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 61  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? I.S. 5 is in alignment with CR Part 154. Newcomers receive ENL services through self-contained ELA and SS classes taught by certified ENL teachers. Entering and emerging students receive 8 periods of ENL instruction via the co-teaching model in ELA classrooms. Transitioning and expanding students receive 4 periods of ENL instruction via the co-teaching model in either ELA or Social Studies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure the achievement of high academic standards, I.S. 5 has aligned all instruction to the CCLS in each subject area. ENL, ELA, and Math instruction are programmed in a combination of three 90-minute blocks and two single periods using the workshop model. Social Studies and Science instruction is given in six 45-minute periods a week. ENL techniques, methodologies, and best practices are interlaced with instruction to engage students, provide multiple entry points, and ensure comprehension. Examples of these practices are: complex texts with support, hands-on activities, visuals, demonstrations, leveled tasks, higher-order thinking questions, sentence/essay frames, and frequent opportunities for academic talk. Our teachers across content areas have been trained in the use of Lily Wong Fillmore and Maryann Cucchiara’s ENL strategies in order to provide ELLs at all proficiency levels access to complex texts, academic vocabulary, and academic writing frames. ELLs are held to the same academic expectations as their peers and are provided scaffolds and supports in order to reach them. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For all New York State assessments, with the exception of the ELA exam, students are provided the English version of the exam as well as a version in their native language (when available). If the exam is not available in the student’s home language, students are provided with translators for these exams. Additionally, students are given word to word translation glossaries for use in class and for the exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE We currently have 9 SIFE students. They are programmed for a combination of block periods and single periods in ESL/ELA as well as Math. They are placed in small groups for differentiated instruction. All instruction is standards-based incorporating the four modalities of language. Teachers analyze data in order to meet the individual needs of their students. Our SIFE students are provided with opportunities to receive additional academic services through ELA afterschool academy and the Afterschool or Saturday ELL Academy. • small groups for differentiated instruction • literacy-building activities • targeted support for individual needs • visuals/imagery • use of the home language for additional support • modified tasks 2018-19 CEP 62  b. Newcomer We presently have 114 Newcomers at I.S. 5 who receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction per week. We have programmed a self-contained ESL class on each grade level in which we place our newcomer ELLs. These students are immersed in the English Language with a focus on building academic vocabulary and the use of a variety of strategies to make grade-level curriculum accessible. Our newcomers are invited to attend the Afterschool or Saturday ELL Academy. These programs provide our ELLs with an opportunity to receive additional support in both ESL and Mathematics. • Google translator • Internet • Visuals • Trans-language support • Leveled texts • Leveled activities • Multiple entry point • Group work and flexible grouping • Listening activities • Graphic organizers c. Developing In the co-teaching environment, ELLs are held to the same standards as their English-dominant peers and are exposed to high-level complex texts and vocabulary and rigorous writing tasks. These students continue to practice their listening and speaking skills in the classroom environment and are provided scaffolds and individualized instruction in order to meet the demands of the reading and writing curriculum. These students also are offered afterschool programs in ELA and ESL. • Sentence starters • Sentence and essay frames • Grouping students based on the outcome of pre-assessments, post-assessments, etc., or their reading levels • Leveled activities • Scaffold support • Listening activities • Graphic organizers d. Long-Term In the co-teaching environment, ELLs are held to the same standards as their English-dominant peers and are exposed to high-level complex texts and vocabulary and rigorous writing tasks. These students continue to practice their listening and speaking skills in the classroom environment and are provided scaffolds and individualized instruction in order to meet the demands of the reading and writing curriculum. These students also are offered afterschool programs in ELA and ENL. • Individual targeted support • Accountable talk • Turn & talk • Think-pair-share • Graphic organizers e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Many of our former ELLs are placed in the same class as advanced ELLs so that they are receiving the additional support of the ENL instructor in the co-teaching ELA classroom even after they have exited ENL services. They are provided with additional time on school-based assessments as well as the required time and a half on State exams. Former ELLs are supported in small group instruction. • Individual targeted support • Support them with grammar activities • Vocabulary activities 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? • Cuchiarra strategies • Images 2018-19 CEP 63  • Videos • Leveled texts and leveled activities • Graphic organizers • Academic language strategies distinguishing vocabulary words explicitly and implicitly and pre-teaching them • Flexible grouping and home language support 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs instruction is driven by each child’s IEP. this ensures that each students is placed in the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs, from self-contained to our relater service students, are given ENL services within their ELA classroom using the co-teaching push-in model. ELL-SWDs are provided differentiated programming to allow for mainstreaming the students according to their abilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers are aware of the school’s philosophy on cognitive rigor and the equity and access necessary for our ELLs to the same learning objective of their general education and honor class counterparts. Rather than isolating our ELL students, teachers modify instructional strategies to provide entry points to complex texts, topics, and tasks ensuring that our ELLs learn the same overall content and concepts. Assessments, pre- and post- especially, are given to students on grade level. The ELA/ENL classroom, as well as other core content areas, exposes ELLs to the complex writing reflected in texts across classrooms. Teachers immerse students in the language of learning, or academic language. It is common to see our students encouraged to use academic language in their discussions in pairs and small group settings, as well as to use their deeper understanding of language to deconstruct and reconstruct a writing prompt or an informational/argumentative piece of text. Students are taught to use a variety of strategies to gain access to sophisticated language. Our ELL/SWDs in the self-contained classroom receive two periods of AIS each week in both ELA and Math to target individual needs revealed in assessment data and provide additional support and remedial instruction to assist students in meeting academic standards. ELL students are invited to attend Math, ELA, and ENL afterschool programs to both target areas of need as well as enrich what they are learning in the classroom. Through our Saturday ELL Academy, students hone their skills in the four modalities through targeted activities in reading and writing, listening and speaking. We are commencing our second year of an arts partnership with ArtsConnection. The organization provides artists-in-residence who partner with I.S. 5 teachers to develop students’ speaking and listening skills through the performing arts. The program specifically targets ELL-SWDs and Newcomer ELLs, but is open to all English Language Learners. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we will be looking at how best to move our Expanding ELLs and continue to provide targeted support to former ELLs who have reached proficiency in the past two years. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No significant changes will be made. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs within our school are given the same instructional program as their general education peers. They are also provided multiple opportunities outside of the school day to foster their academic, social and emotional progress. The ELA, Math and ENL enrichment programs provide academic support and enrichment to former and current ELLs afterschool two days a week in a small group setting. The Saturday ELL Academy provides three hours of additional instruction to build the reading, writing, 2018-19 CEP 64  listening and speaking skills of ELLs. In addition, ELLs are encouraged to participate in clubs and afterschool sports activities to socialize with their peers. ENL instruction is never provided at the expense of another subject area or special activity. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. • On-line reading program MyOn to support students’ reading needs • Bilingual translation • Smartboard, Elmo, and online translator 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All ELLs may use glossaries and translation to support their learning in both ELA/ENL and the content areas. Students have some access to literature in their home languages in select classroom libraries and the school library. When possible, teachers employ the use of the home language to introduce concepts in the classroom and support learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELL students are given the same access to the ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies curriculum as their general education peers. To ensure that their needs are met, teachers modify texts and tasks to give all students an entry point. Complex texts are scaffolded across content areas to make the material accessible to ELLs at differing proficiency levels. ELLs are given age-appropriate texts rather than oversimplified elementary texts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? • On-line reading program MyOn to support students’ reading needs • Bilingual translation • Smartboard, Elmo, and online translator 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are assigned a buddy in their classroom to travel with in the hallways and help them adjust to a new school environment. Whenever possible, the buddy shares the same first language. Newcomer ELLs are assigned the same guidance counselor who meets with the students and checks in with them to ease their transition. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives currently available for our ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 65  For the past five years, I.S. 5 staff members have been receiving professional development in ELL strategies from Maryann Cucchiara. The intensive professional development in deconstructing and reconstructing complex texts, understanding and building sophisticated language, and connecting texts, talk, and tasks began with the ELA/ENL department and has since branched out to include Social Studies, Science, Math and the Fine and Performing Arts. Lead teachers have participated in the training and have been asked to turn-key the PD with their content area teacher teams. Through this work, teachers have learned how to “demystify” complex texts and build in academic language for ALL students. In addition to this past partnership, teachers from varied subject areas have been attending workshops offered by the O-ELLs with the intent that they will then share their learnings with their teacher teams. See above. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselors work closely with 8th grade students in the spring of their 7th grade year and fall of their 8th grade year to aid students in researching high schools and completing their high school applications. The guidance counselors help students select schools that best match their individual language learning needs as well as their personal interests. When teachers attend out of building professional development sessions, they are required to submit a copy of their training materials and meet with their supervisors to discuss how their learning experience may translate into classroom and school practice. In-house professional development, including Monday professional development and inquiry, is documented by maintaining a copy of the agenda and a sign-in sheet. For ENL teachers, the Monday professional development time rotates between ENL-focused meetings and content (ELA & SS) meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? I.S. 5 believes that parental involvement is essential to the success of all students, including ELLs. Parents complete the Parent Survey and Selection form for their child. They are given multiple opportunities to come in for orientation sessions early in the school year. All parents are welcome to schedule meetings with teachers on Tuesday afternoons to discuss individual student progress or any concerns. When needed, other adults in the building are scheduled to assist with translation, or phone translation services are utilized. School documents are sent home in English, Spanish, and Chinese. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students are supported with on-site (when possible) translation or translation services over the phone. Parent Association meetings are held in English with Spanish translation. School documentation is sent home in English, Spanish and Chinese whenever possible. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kelly Nepogoda, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q005 School Name: Walter H. Crowley School of Leaders Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. For currently enrolled students, ATS records indicate the home langauge of our students. For any newly enrolled student, we adminsiter the Home Language Survey to determine which language will allow us to best communicate with the parents/guardians. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Albanian-1 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 70  Amoy- 2 Arabic- 7 Bengali- 195 Burmese- 6 Chinese (unknown)- 7 Chinese- 99 Cantonese- 26 Dutch- 1 Dzongkha- 1 Gujarati- 8 Greek- 1 Guarani- 2 Hindi- 10 Ibo- 1 Indonesian- 29 Japanese- 3 Korean- 7 Khoisan- 1 Moldavian- 1 Mandarin- 147 Malayalam-2 Nepali- 37 Pashto- 2 Philipino- 31 Punjabi- 10 Polish- 3 2018-19 CEP 71  Portuguese- 1 Russian- 2 Serbo-Croatian- 1 Slovak- 1 Spanish- 791 Tamil- 2 Tigre- 3 Thai- 13 Tibetan- 13 Turkish- 1 Urdu- 19 Ukranian- 1 Vietnamese- 3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School correspondence, through the use of the New York City Translation Unit, is translated into as many native langauges as possible. School-wide notices are always distributed in English, Spanish, and Chinese. Office 2018-19 CEP 72  staff utilize phone translation services to communicate with parents of other language backgrounds. The Discipline Code, high school information , and all other city-wide communications are distributed in as many home languages as are made available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher conferences- 4/year, Curriculum Family nights- 4/year, Testing Information Nights- 3-4/year, Promotion-in-Doubt Parent Meetings- 3/year, Parent Association Meetings & Workshops 9/year, High School Information night 1/year, weekly parent contact meetings with individual teachers, disciplinary conferences as needed, regular guidance parent meetings, walk-in parent questions daily 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 CEP 73   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In-house staff will assist with translation in the languages spoken by staff in the building. School communication will be translated into the primary languages spoken by our parents (Spanish, Chinese, and Bengali). All other home languages will receive a cover sheet with instructions for how to utilize translation services. As much as budget allows, additional interpreters will be hired for whole-school parent events. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school distributes a school-created survey to parents in the Fall, and the Learning Environment Survey in the Spring. This data is utilized to analyze and imptrove out parent communication. Additionally, parents who are part of the School Leadership Team and Parent Association provide feedback on a regular basis. 2018-19 CEP 74 
