2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q007 School Name: P.S. 007 LOUIS F. SIMEONE Principal: SARA TUCCI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Louis F. Simeone 342400010007 Kindergarten – 4th Grade School Number (DBN): 24Q007 80-55 Cornish Avenue, Elmhurst, New York 11373 718-326-0272 Phone Number: 718-397-7906 Fax: Jason Chin jchin13@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Jason Chin Fredda Pichardo Guadalupe Puryear Theresa Rugolo Serena Ng N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 Avenue, Corona, New York 11368 Superintendent’s Office Address: MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergrast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5488 Phone Number: 718-391-6152 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jason Chin Fredda Pichardo Guadalupe Puryear Ramona Toledo Serena Ng Koli Kabir Theresa Rugolo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jessica DeGiovanni Bridget Ruggiero Lisa Catapano Cristina Furlong Lubria Rashad Annlex Arrigada Reina Gonzalez Member/Teacher Member/AP Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement at P.S. 7Q is to inspire a love of literacy and foster high standards of work and behavior, using research based practices and technology, and thereby creating lifelong learners in a safe environment. Contributing to the success of our children is the partnership we share amongst the parents, our community organizations, and our school community, which provides a nurturing, supportive environment. This environment, which will help foster the development of academic, civic, social, and technological skills, will optimize our students’ potential to function productively in the 21 st Century. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Louis F. Simeone School 7Q is a barrier free school located in the Elmhurst section of Queens, New York. Our building opened in 1994 and provides a child-centered, stimulating learning environment for approximately 1019 students in grades Kindergarten through third. Due to overcrowding, as of September 2003, our fourth and fifth grade students moved to the 51 st Avenue Academy. In September 2004, the Academy became a separate and independent entity, P.S. 877Q. Our school works in conjunction with external organizations in order to meet our students’ needs. We work in collaboration with Child Center of N.Y., Western Queens Consultation Center and the Lower East Side Family Union. Members of their staff come to our school to help students deal with emotional problems. To help ease this transition and welcome families from different backgrounds into our nation and community our school offers various forms of the required ENL services for students who are in need of language instruction. Our school offers English through the use of Dual Language, Self Contained and free standing ENL classes. All modalities of language (speaking, listening, reading and writing) are focused upon during literacy instruction as well as during content area learning. After school and Saturday programs are given to further help students grasp the language and gain academic and social skills. The administration and staff at P.S. 7Q is committed to ensure all students achieve. To this end we aim to support the ELL families in our school with the social and academic aspects of their lives.P.S. 7 strives to improve communication with all families especially those of our ELL students. We offer ENL classes to parents in an effort to help our constituent families learn the new language they are immersed in. These classes also help families assimilate into the cultural aspects of their surroundings. Translation services allow new immigrant families to participate in their children's education through active participation in parent, teacher, staff meetings as well as keeping families informed of upcoming events with written correspondence in their native language. These services are provided by both the NYCDOE and the staff at P.S.7Q. We have also provided a number of educational resources and programs to our parents such as: Parent Lending Library and Mommy and Me classes. This provides our parents with resources to promote social skills, oral language development and Kindergarten readiness skills. We also provide workshops on different curriculum areas and ENL classes. We are continuing to provide more technology in the classrooms. All classrooms have interactive promethean boards and laptops. As a result, students are able to have access to educational software which helps differentiate individual instruction in math, and reading. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our student population consists largely of English Language Learners. Many of our students and their families are new to the country and are in need of assistance to acclimate themselves not just into a new educational system, but within a new society and culture. ENL Workshops are provided to parents to help them learn the new language as well as inform them of services provided within and outside of the school. Special Education classes are provided at each grade level to serve the needs of students with disabilities. These classes include ICT classes as well as 12:1. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P.S. 7 strives to provide rigorous instruction for all students. Ongoing professional development pertaining to all subject areas is provided to all staff members on a weekly basis. A Teachers College staff developer trains teachers on different aspects of literacy. During the 2016-2017 school year, model classroom teachers also attended TC workshops and turn keyed this information to other staff members. In order to ensure students are performing to their best ability all lessons are differentiated to meet individual needs. PS 7 will continue to provide opportunities for students to be engaged at all levels by providing feedback on classroom observations, continued professional development and teacher collaboration. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q007 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 993 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 65 64 58 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 N/A 40 40 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 80.3% % Reduced Lunch 47.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 34.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 58 95.1% 7.6% 9.9% 0.4% 61.5% 0.4% 4 6% 7.2 63.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher needs and areas of improvement are ascertained through a review of through teacher observations and PD surveys. Although teachers receive training throughout the school year on a variety of areas, like our students, they also need differentiated guidance and professional development in order to strengthen teaching practices, improve student performance and increase the rigor of instruction in all classrooms. In order to help teachers improve their craft and ensure expert instruction in the classroom, formal and mini-observations will be implemented throughout the school year, articulating clear expectations through the use of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching, and aligned to the Advance Teacher Evaluation System. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, all teachers (100%) will continue receiving individualized feedback and differentiated professional development through a cycle of observations using the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching, with an emphasis on domain 3 (3b, 3c, 3d). A rating of HEDI will be given. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal, assistant principals and F-status supervisor will conduct either one formal and three mini-observations, six mini-observations or four mini-observations (depending on the teachers evaluation option choice) per teacher throughout the school year using the Framework for Teaching (Charlotte Danielson’s rubrics) to provide feedback and support to all teachers. Upon completion of each observation the principal and/or assistant principal conducting the observation, will provide timely feedback concerning strengths as well as areas of improvement in an effort to support teachers as they drive instruction in the classroom. As a result of these mini- observations and feedback, teachers will have the opportunity to participate in differentiated professional development to improve their teaching practices based on these supervisory reports. Teachers will be able to choose their own areas of interest to improve upon when participating in Monday and Tuesday cycles of inquiry (math, literacy, ENL and technology workshops) during cycles of learning, teacher collaboration, cycles of inquiry time as well as attendance of Teachers College or Go Math workshops. Teachers will have the opportunity to receive ongoing training to help them develop a better understanding of the Framework for Teaching ( Charlotte Danielson’s rubrics) and how it will be used to enhance classroom learning for our students. Teachers will also gain a deeper knowledge of how to use questioning and higher order reasoning strategies in order to improve students’ critical thinking skills. This training takes place during DOE professional development days and weekly Monday – Tuesday cycles of learning and cycles of inquiry and teacher collaboration. Teachers will set individual, professional goals in order to enhance their knowledge in the units of study and teaching skills. Teachers’ professional goals as well as observation reports will be used to plan for professional development. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September – June Principal and Assistant Principals All Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals and Coach All Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach and all Teachers 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers on each grade are selected to provide support to other classroom teachers in the various subject areas through intra-visitation. These teachers also provide professional development to staff during Monday professional development time. During this time information obtained during off-site professional development is shared with other staff members. All teachers September-June Lab-site Teachers and Grade Leaders Teachers College Staff Developer works with teachers on each grade to coach them on how to better use the workshop model and teacher conferences to instruct children based on their needs. All teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher feedback is used to create more rigorous and effective instruction. The instructional practices used in the classroom based on the feedback is communicated to parents by the teacher on an ongoing basis (Sept.-June) during Parent Engagement time and parent conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal and assistant principals will conduct a series of ongoing observations throughout the school year using the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching and Advance. Our principal, assistant principals and F-status supervisor along with the staff developer will provide all teachers with professional development regarding the use of the Charlotte Danielson framework for Teaching rubric and Advance evaluation system so that teachers will gain a deeper understanding of its evaluative purposes and teacher expectations. 2018-19 CEP 15  Our principal and assistant principals will conduct ongoing observations and provide timely feedback to all teachers. Along with our staff developer, they will provide one-on-one and small group support to our teachers. Teachers will also provide support to other teachers through inter and intra-visitation. Teachers will set their own individual professional goals which are then submitted to the principal. Teachers will receive Teachers College Staff Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2017 100% of all teachers will have participated in two observations and receive feedback. The principal, assistant principals and F-status supervisor have analyzed data gathered during formal and mini-observations in conjunction with the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching rubrics to rate teacher and lesson effectiveness as evidenced by supervisory feedback. 100% of the staff have participated in two observations and 50% of the staff have participated in three observations. Professional development regarding the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching and the Advanced Education System has been and will continue to be provided to all teachers throughout the school year as evidenced by PD agendas and attendance. In addition, individualized feedback is given to each teacher during the post observation interview to provide positive reinforcements as well as guidance pertaining to best teaching practices. Such feedback has proven to aid in teacher growth as evidenced through subsequent observations and walk-throughs. June HEDI scores, as well as teacher progress ratings will be submitted by the principal. In February 2018, 100% of all teachers will have participated in two observations and received feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure is the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching, teacher observations and Advance. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the 2015-2016 school year, 51.9% of students scored at levels 3 and 4. In the 2016-2017 school year, 47% of students scored at these levels. Therefore there continues to be a need for differentiated and individualized instruction with a strong focus on problem solving and mathematical reasoning skills. In an effort to improve understanding and performance in these areas, that will be built upon as student's progress from second into third grade, our math coach will plan professional development towards increasing these skills as teachers plan instruction to better guide students towards proficiency in these areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 55% of all students in Grades 2-3 will continue improving their problem solving skills by one benchmark level in math as demonstrated by growth from a baseline assessment to a Common Core aligned math performance task. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will use the Mathematical Read Alouds, Shared Reading and Shared Writing as well as the Go Math Program to create lessons and differentiated instruction in order to ready students for the CCLS aligned assessment tasks and New York State Math Exam in grade 3. Teachers will assess students’ progress preceding the administration of these tasks using a baseline assessment and plan instruction accordingly in an effort to ensure high levels of task performance by our students. Based on teacher conference notes and recommendations, students in need of further instructional assistance will participate in the math after school program. This program will work to reinforce the problem solving skills needed to succeed on the CCLS aligned assessment/task and NYS math exam. In addition, students and teachers will engage in various math based cycles of inquiry in an effort to meet individual needs and increase student performance. Classroom libraries will continue to be increased to support math competencies. In this way, students will have access to more math based materials. As students read more of this type of information on their own (during the readers and math workshops as well as at home with their families) they will have the opportunity to perform and use the skills learned in the classroom for a variety of reasons and to generate their own tasks/projects. Students in all grades will be assessed in three Common Core aligned Math Tasks. The assessments as well as students’ results will be documented and placed in pupil portfolios. Results of the CCLS aligned math baselines and tasks will be analyzed by the data specialist as well as the assistant principal to determine areas of student strengths and weaknesses as well as student growth. This information will then be explored further by classroom teachers to plan effective whole class and differentiated instruction. Teachers will continue to receive ongoing math professional development to enhance their understanding of how to teach computation and problem solving skills through the use of balanced literacy strategies as evidenced by PD agendas and attendance. To increase higher order thinking skills, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All K – 3 rd Grade Students September - June Coach Teachers All K – 3 rd Grade Students September - June Assistant Principal Teachers All K – 3 rd Grade Students September -June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach and Purchasing Secretary All K – 3 rd Grade Students September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, and Data Specialist All K-3rd Grade Students September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  development will include ways in which to promote mathematical reasoning and the use of higher order questioning techniques through interactive writing, interactive read aloud with accountable talk, and shared reading. Cycles of learning and teacher collaboration will also include an exploration of the NYS Common Core Learning Standards in an effort to differentiate instruction based on these rubrics and student needs. In-house and off-site professional development will be given to teachers and staff, including one-on-one support from supervisors, and the coach as evidenced by PD agendas and attendance. Such PD will include but is not limited to lab-sites, in-house and off-site professional development, study and intra and inter-visitation. Classroom visits by the principal and assistant principals, using walk through checklists and the Enhancing Professional Practice, Framework for Teaching by Charlotte Danielson will provide feedback to all teachers on how to further improve classroom instruction. Formal and informal observations allow the supervisory staff to provide immediate feedback to our teachers regarding their strengths as well as areas of improvement in an effort to improve classroom instruction for all. Teacher observations and lesson plans are analyzed to determine the use and effectiveness of balanced literacy within the math workshop and to promote mathematical reasoning as evidenced by supervisory checklists and observation feedback. The data specialist and the assistant principal evaluate the data scores of the math baselines and tasks to assess student growth. This information is evaluated by classroom teachers and used to drive instruction. The coach will analyze information gained through teacher surveys and needs assessment in order to determine the quantity and types of mathematical materials and books needed in the classroom. The coach along with the purchasing secretary will maintain records of purchase orders and distribution lists of such materials. Teacher recommendations for admittance to the After-school Math Program takes place on a daily basis through the use of teacher and Go Math checklists as well as conference notes and small group work. Math unit tests are used to evaluate student progress approximately every three weeks. Students will strengthen skills through the use of technology. The Go Math Think Central website will be used to differentiate instruction for all students. Parents can participate in Tuesday Parent Engagement workshops where teachers model the skills and activities learned in class and extend learning into the home by modeling games and techniques that can be done with the family to enhance learning. All Teachers September - June Principal and Assistant Principals All K - 3rd Grade Students September - May Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach and Teachers Classroom teachers September Literacy/Math Coach and Purchasing secretary At-Risk Math Students October - March Classroom Teachers Students K-3 September-Classroom Teachers June Parents and students K-3 September-June Teachers K-3 2018-19 CEP 20 Students and teachers participate in various cycles of inquiry during which time teachers explore best teaching practices in order to improve student mathematical reasoning. Teachers and Students K-3 September-June Administration and Teachers K-3 All Teachers Professional Development will include an exploration of the NYS CCLS in an effort to differentiate instruction used in accordance with these rubrics. September - June Principal, Assistant Princpals and Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to promote problem solving skills parents are made aware of the skills to be learned in each Go Math unit of study. These letters are sent home monthly. Mathematical read alouds are modeled for parents during bimonthly principal meetings, as well as weekly Tuesday parent engagement sessions. Individual student needs are addressed with parents during parent meetings and parent teacher conferences. (Sept.-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers will create differentiated math lessons and monitor student progress using the Go Math Program along with a balanced literacy approach to mathematical reasoning. All classroom teachers will also administer the CCLS aligned baseline and task three times per year. Teachers will monitor student math performance and make recommendations for attendance to our After-School Math Programs. All teachers, (Classroom, ENL, AIS and cluster) will create and deliver effective differentiated instruction during these programs. The classroom teacher along with the coach will monitor student progress in coordination with the materials/books needed to help each student increase their computational and mathematical reasoning skills. Our staff developer will facilitate the administration and the baselines, interim and end task assessments in all grades to assess student performance in a variety of grade appropriate mathematical activities. The classroom teachers will use the results of the above to effectively plan whole group and differentiated math instruction. Our principal, assistant principals, staff developer will provide ongoing math professional development to all staff members. Our coach and classroom teachers will attend professional development as well as participate in math cycles of inquiry and inter/intra-visitation. 2018-19 CEP 21  Our principal and assistant principals will conduct ongoing observations and classroom visits using math checklists. Timely feedback from these observations will allow teachers to reflect upon their teaching as they receive information regarding their strengths and weaknesses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February 2018, 32.4% of all second and third grade students have improved their problem solving skills by one or more benchmark level. As of February 2018, 28.9% of second grade students increased their problem solving skills by one benchmark level. 9.3% of these students increased their problem solving skills by two benchmark levels. As of February 2018, 36.2% of the students increased by one benchmark level. In addition, 4.7% of the students increased by two benchmark levels. The classroom teachers will use the results of the midyear assessment to effectively plan whole group and differentiated math instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure is the growth from the baseline assessment to a Common Core aligned math performance task. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is our belief that in order to increase student performance, it is important to increase the communication among all stakeholders in our school community. For this reason it was deemed necessary to continue improving communication among all staff members, parents and students. We have looked into ways to improve the level and types of communication used among our students, teachers and administrators in order to improve the academic and social achievement of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, school leaders will continue creating a collaborative school community to increase effective communication and engagement that is truthful and respectful with all stakeholders (school staff, parents and students) by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses and community based organizations as measured by meeting attendance, agendas, and reflection forms. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal/Parent and Parent Association meetings are held bi-monthly and monthly respectively. School activities, Parent Workshops, Curricula, Instructional goals and activities are introduced and discussed during these meetings in order for parents to better understand the units of study and skills being taught in the classroom, ways in which parents can extend learning into the home, as well as upcoming activities in the school. Teachers and parents will participate in Meet the Staff Night. At this venue parents will get to know their child’s teacher as well as the units of study and skills to be learned. Classroom routines, student expectations and parental questions/concerns are addressed at this time. Meet the Staff Night is participated in by parents and teachers as evidenced by meeting agendas, hand-outs, parent letters and attendance logs. Parent Teacher Conferences are held each November and March. During these meetings parents can discuss their child’s progress with the classroom and content area teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September - June Principal, Parent Coordinator and Parents Association Parents September, November and March All Staff Members Families will participate in the Fair Share Night in May. Students will showcase their work in order to provide their parents with an understanding of their progress throughout the year. School staff, Parents and students May Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer and Teachers. The School Leadership team meets monthly in order for parents, teachers and administration to share ideas, goals, activities and concerns regarding curriculum and school activities. Parents will be invited to participate in the volunteer Learning Leader program. Title I Parental Involvement Committee meetings are held throughout the year. A monthly calendar is distributed to all students to inform parents of school activities and special programs. Parent correspondence including the school's monthly calendar and student of the month announcements are distributed on a monthly basis throughout the school year. Curriculum letters in Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers and Parents Parents Parents Parents Parents September - June Parents Association and SLT Chairperson September - June Parent Coordinator September - June Title I Representative September - June September - June Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals and Staff Developer 2018-19 CEP 24  all subject areas (translated in different languages: Spanish, Chinese, and Bengali) are distributed to all students/parents. Informational letters about different activities/events are distributed on an as needed basis. Parents September - June Principal, Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator facilitates parent workshops, which, are held in our school on a variety of topics. Parents Student of the Month and Perfect Attendance Awards are awarded monthly and at the end of the school year. Students September - June September - June Parent Coordinator Attendance Secretary and Teachers ENL classes for parents are given throughout the school year. Parents October - June Parent Coordinator and ENL Department The NYS Schools Account Link gives parents access to their child's progress. Parents The Principal Report is distributed and discussed during PA Meetings. Parents September - June September - June Data Specialist Principal Arts Program - Teachers and students work with Casa Broadway in order to enhance students' knowledge of the arts and cultural diversity. Parent workshops inform our school community members on a variety of topics based on the needs of our students and families. ENL classes enable parents to work with their children who already attend our school as well as those approaching entrance into Kindergarten. Title I Parental Involvement provides opportunities for families to participate in various cultural activities throughout the city, i.e. Museum of Natural History. Parents are provided with resources such as the Lending Library for all students and Mommy and Me classes for students of preschool age. Our school works in collaboration with the Child Center of NY, the Western Queens Consultation Center and the Lower East Side Family Union in order to meet students' and family social and emotional needs. Reflection/evaluation forms about events/activities are completed by staff and parents at the conclusion of the meeting/events to assess their effectiveness. Surveys for parents and teachers are completed regularly to gather ideas on how to create a more effective school community. P.S. 7 Schoolwires allows teachers to communicate upcoming events, projects and classroom activities with parents and students. K - 3rd Grade Students September - June` Art & AIS Teacher Parents September - June Parent Coordinator, ENL Department Students and Families September - June Parent Coordinator Parents and Students September - June Parent Coordinator All Students and Families September - June Guidance Counselor Parents, All Staff members September - June Parents, Teachers September - June Parents September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer Data Specialist Discipline Code/Contract and Cell Phone Policy is signed and agreed to by parents. Parents and Students September Principal, Assistant Principals and Department of Education 2018-19 CEP 25  Cycles of Inquiry are participated in by teachers in various positions (grades K-3, ENL, Cluster). During this time ideas are shared and there is a joint exploration of best teaching practices. The results of such inquiry is shared with the staff. Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer Weekly Professional Development and one-on-one teacher/supervisory meetings allow for the sharing of pedagogical ideas and best teaching practices. The principal has an open door policy for staff and parents. Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer and PD Committee Students, Staff and Parents September - June Principal Grade leaders, lead teachers and staff developers communicate information amongst staff. All Teachers September - June Grade Leaders, Lead Teachers and Staff Developer Staff members turnkey information learned during off-site professional development, share expertise and present at workshops. Title I Parental Involvement, guidance counselors, social worker, and school psychologist meet with parents to share information about school related activities as well as about individual students needs. Parent communication is facilitated by each teacher during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time for a session of 35 minutes. During this time teachers meet with parents and conduct parent learning sessions to extend classroom lessons into the home and correspond/communicate with families through P.S. 7 Schoolwires, phone calls and emails. Parents are invited into their children's classrooms to view the instruction across curriculum areas. Open School Week provides parents an opportunity to see the instruction that occurs in the classroom. Student publishing celebrations allow parents to view the units of study learned in class. This will, therefore, help the parents support students at home. During these celebrations parents have the opportunity to see their children's work and gain insight into the teaching practices used in the classroom. Parents are invited into classrooms during parent involvement time to learn the techniques and skills used to teach their children. Teachers model lessons and provide suggestions on how learning can be extended outside the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September All Teachers June Parents and Students September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Association, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist Parents September - June Teachers Parents November Teachers Parents September- May Teachers Parents September - May Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  In order to increase parental involvement within our school community, letters are sent home in different languages. School calendar is sent home on a monthly basis to inform parents of all school events. Letters are also sent home on the units of study learned each month. Teachers collaborate in order to plan rigorous instruction for each unit of study. Families are encouraged to participate in all school events including, Parents Association and School Leadership Team. Teachers meet with parents on an ongoing basis. (Sept-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal holds bi-monthly meetings to keep parents apprised of school activities and important news. The parent association president and parent coordinator hold monthly meetings to keep parents informed of school activities, workshops, parent interests and concerns as well as important school information. Administrators, parents and teachers participate in Meet the Staff Night. The principal, assistant principals, PA President, parents and teachers are active participants of the School Leadership Team. The parent coordinator and parents participate in the Voluntary Learning Leader program. The Parent Lending Library is maintained by the parent coordinator for parents to use as evidenced by parent book logs. The Title I representative, parent coordinator, PA President and parents participate in the Title I Parent Involvement Committee. School staff, including the coach, secretaries, and the parent coordinator create and distribute monthly letters regarding school activities and curricula. The parent coordinator, staff developer, PA President and teachers along with outside professionals create and facilitate a variety of parent workshops and family activities for our parent constituency. The principal and assistant principals along with teachers facilitate monthly Student of the Month award ceremonies and/or end of the year Perfect Attendance Ceremony. The parent coordinator, assistant principal and ENL teachers coordinate to create and facilitate ENL classes for parents. The parent coordinator keeps parents informed about information they can access on the NYC Schools Account. The principal and Parent Association President coordinate to provide a principal report during PA meetings. Staff and school community members including staff developer, PA President, parent coordinator, teachers and parents create, administer, complete and evaluate event/activity reflection and evaluation surveys. The data specialist facilitates the usage of Schoolwires which allows teachers and parents to communicate on-line. Parents work with school personnel when agreeing to the Discipline Code and Cell Phone Policy. 2018-19 CEP 27  The principal, assistant principals, teachers and staff developer, coordinate and facilitate various cycles of inquiry, cycles of learning and collaboration. Grade leaders help teachers and staff with concerns and keep them apprised of school and grade specific information. Teachers and coach turnkey instructional as well as other pertinent information gathered from off-site staff development during collaboration time each Monday and Tuesday. Resources used to enhance our school include: Title I Parent Involvement, staff, guidance counselors, social worker and school psychologist. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. P.S. 7Q continues to strengthen communication and collaboration among parents, teachers, students and our community. Reflection/evaluation forms regarding the events, activities and workshops participated in by parents and/or staff members have been and will continue to be analyzed (when needed) at the conclusion of each meeting/event. This is done to asses the amount and effectiveness of such communication. Parent communication such as curriculum letters/meeting reminders are distributed as evidenced by records of communication. As of February 2018, our school has created a collaborative community that involves all stakeholders. This has been accomplished through student and parent letters, parent workshops, Schoolwires, parent engagement, and professional development and parent meeting reflection forms. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure is meeting attendance, agendas and reflection forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2015-2016 NYS ELA scores, fewer of our students are performing at levels 3 and 4 than during the previous year. In the 2015-2016 school year, 42.5% of students scored at levels 3 and 4. In the 2016-2017 school year, 44% of the students scored at levels 3 and 4. Although there has been a slight increase, we will continue to work on looking in depth at the results of this exam to determine which skills our students are deficient in. In this way the administration, professional development team, and literacy coach can plan professional development and teachers can plan instruction to better guide students towards proficiency in these areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 45% of students in grades K-3 will improve by at least three reading levels as measured by the Teachers College Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to increase ELA scores for our third grade students, we will move to raise the reading levels of our students in all grades. In this way literacy skills will be built upon what was taught during the previous years. Students' progress will be monitored using the Teachers College running records in an effort to progressively increase reading levels of our students throughout the school year. In order to accomplish this, teachers will participate in monthly differentiated professional development, TC calendar days, lab-sites, in-house and off-site professional development, intra-visitation, inter-visitation, one-on-one support by the literacy coach, and teacher supervisory conferences. This is done to deepen their understanding of all teaching practices such as conferring, read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, strategy lessons, and close reading. All classroom teachers will use the TC running records in order to determine flexible grouping in the classroom and differentiated instruction to aid in moving students to the next reading level. Students will be assessed quarterly: September, November, January, March and May. Based on the Home Language Survey, English proficiency, and teacher recommendations, students will participate in ENL and/or RtI services. Teachers and students will receive support from AIS providers who will provide small group and individualized instruction. Students will receive 10 books to read at home each week. Student books in a bag will be monitored monthly to determine students' just right book levels as measured by their reading levels using the TC running records. Second and third grade students' reading logs will be collected every month to assess reading stamina. All grades will participate in the Books Across America program to increase the number of books read at home. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers K-3 September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Teachers Students K-3 September- June Classroom Teachers K-3 Students K-3 September - June ENL and AIS Teachers Students K-3 September- June Classroom Teachers K-3 Students will receive phonemic/word solving instruction using Fundations. Students K-3 September-June Classroom, ENL, and RtI Teachers Teachers and students will participate in various literacy based Inquiry Teams to further differentiate instruction and increase the reading levels of our at-risk students. Students K-3 September -All Teachers June 2018-19 CEP 30  At risk students identified through a universal assessment (TC running records) will receive RtI services. (Tier I, Tier II, Tier III) in the classroom, 5:1, and 3:1 settings respectively. Parents will participate in Tuesday parent engagement workshops in which teachers will instruct family members regarding the reading and writing activities done during class and those that can be done at home to increase literacy skills. During this time parents are instructed on how to extend the literacy skills learned in class to the home environment using reading and phonics games as well as questioning and shared reading techniques. Principal/Parent meetings are held bi-monthly during which time the principal models techniques used in the classroom which parents can replicate at home with their children. Meet the Staff Night is held each September in an effort to give parents insight into the curriculum being taught, student expectations, as well as an opportunity to address concerns. Parent Teacher Conferences are held each November and March to inform parents of their child's progress and provide feedback on how to improve reading competencies at home. Monthly curriculum letters are sent to parents describing the units and skills being taught in all content areas. These letters extend classroom learning into the home by giving parents tips on how to further increase their children's proficiency in each subject area. Correspondence from the school is translated into the major languages of our student body including Spanish, Chinese and Bengali. All staff members will participate in professional development regarding the use of RtI to increase student performance as well as an in-depth look at the Charlotte Danielson Framework for teaching. Through the use of this tool, teachers will be instructed on how to provide ongoing needs based instruction. Professional development will include an exploration of the NYS CCLS in an effort to differentiate instruction used in accordance with these rubrics. Classroom visits with the principal and assistant principals using walkthrough checklist and the Enhancing Professional Practice, Framework for Teaching by Charlotte Danielson will provide feedback to all teachers on how to further improve classroom instruction. Students are encouraged to read both in class and at home using the RAZ Kids, Imagine Learning and Lexia online reading programs. This program allows students to read fiction and non fiction books as well as answer questions based upon the text. After school and Saturday Literacy and ENL programs are provided to students in grades 1 - 3 to aid in the development of all literacy areas. Students learn phonemic, decoding, and comprehension skills needed to increase their reading levels. At Risk Students K-3 September - June Classroom, ENL, and Rti Teachers Parents and Students K-3 September - June Classroom Teachers K-3 Parents and Students K-3 September - June Principal and Parent Association Parents and Students K-3 September Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers Parents and Students K-3 September - June Principal, Assistant Principals and Coach All Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals and Coach All Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals and Coach All Teachers September - June Principal and Assistant Principals Students K-3 September - June Classroom teachers K-3 Students 1 -3 October - May Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 31 Teachers on each grade are selected to provide support to other classroom teachers in the various subject areas through intra-visitation. These teachers also provide professional development to the staff during Monday professional development time. During this time information is obtained during off-site professional development is shared with other staff members. Teachers September - June Lab-site Teachers and Grade Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to promote literacy skills parents are made aware of the concepts learned in each reading unit of study. read alouds/and shared reading are modeled for parents during principal meetings, as well as Tuesday parent engagement sessions. Individual student needs are addressed with parents during parent meetings, and parent teacher conferences. Student progress strategies used to teach literacy, professional development, and after school programs are discussed during monthly SLT meetings. (Sept-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal and assistant principals will conduct a series of observations and walkthroughs to ensure teachers are providing high quality, differentiated instruction using best teaching practices. The principal, assistant principals and coach will conduct professional development regarding a variety of literacy and ENL topics to ensure best teaching practices and differentiated instruction are used in each classroom. Classroom teachers will attend off site Teachers College Calendar Days and will then turn-key the information learned to all staff members. TC Readers workshop classroom materials will be purchased to aid teachers in developing and planning rigorous instruction. The TC Staff Devleloper will work with teachers in-house to provide support in this subject area. The Books Across America program is facilitated by all classroom teachers and funded by our schools parent association. The book bags and reading materials are provided to our students to take home and read in class. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February 2018, our students improved in the following ways:  34% of students in grades K - 3 improved by three or more levels.  27% of Kindergarten students improved by at least three reading levels.  55% of first grade students increased by three or more levels.  38% of second grade students increased by three or more levels.  16% of third grade students increased by three or more levels. The principal, assistant principals, coach, and teachers will continue to conduct professional development regarding literacy instruction, and differentiation. Classroom teachers that attend off site Teachers College Calendar Days will turn key this information to other staff members. A Teachers College Staff Developer will continue to work with the staff regarding literacy instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure is Teachers College Running Records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although the results of the 2016-2017 NYS Performance Assessment indicates that students have shown improvements in all areas of writing, there continues to be a need for differentiated and individualized instruction as many of our ELLs are performing 1 and 2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2018, 50% of ELLs in grades K - 3 will improve by at least one benchmark, as measured by the Teachers College Writing Rubrics (narrative and informational.) 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students will engage in narrative and informative baseline and end of the unit writing assignment that will be used to measure each students progress in a variety of writing skills. Students K -3 October, January, March, May Classroom Teachers Non-fiction classroom libraries will continue to be increased in order to infuse opportunities for students to read and respond to informational texts. Students K-3 September - June Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, Purchasing Secretary Teachers will use the baseline and interim assessment data, along with all available student data to identify student needs accordingly and plan appropriate instruction. Students K -3 September - Teachers K - 3 June Teachers will analyze the Teachers College writing assessments using the TC writing rubric in order to assess students' progress. Students K - 3 October - May Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom Teachers K - 3 Teachers will use the teachers College units of study, Read Alouds, Shared reading, Close reading, and Shared Writing to create lessons and differentiated instruction to ready students for each writing assessment. Teachers will assess student progress preceding the administration of these tasks to plan instruction accordingly in an effort to insure high levels of task performance by our students. Based on teacher conference notes and recommendations, students in need of further instructional assistance will participate in the literacy and ENL after school and Saturday academy programs. These programs will work to reinforce the skills needed to succeed on the writing assessments. Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach Students K - 3 October - May Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers At risk reading students will participate in the Response to Intervention Program (RtI), which will target students' individual needs. At Risk Students September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, RtI Teachers Students and teachers will engage in various literacy based inquiry teams in an effort to meet individual needs and increase student performance. Students and Teachers K - 3 September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers will continue to receive weekly literacy professional development to enhance their understanding of how to teach word solving and comprehension skills through the use of balanced literacy strategies so that students are able to respond to non-fiction texts. Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach 2018-19 CEP 35  In-house and off-site professional development will be given to teachers and staff, including one-on-one support from supervisors and coach as evidenced by PD agendas and attendance. Such PD will include, but is not limited to, TC calendar days, lab sites, in-house and off-site professional development, and intra-visitation and inter-visitation. Classroom visits by the principal, assistant principals and coach using walk-through checklists and Enhancing Professional Practice Framework for teaching by Charlotte Danielson will provide feedback to all teachers on how to improve classroom instruction. Formal and informal observations will allow the supervisory staff to provide immediate feedback to teachers regarding their strengths as well as areas of improvement. Teachers on each grade are selected to provide support to other classroom teachers in the various subject areas through intra-visitation. These teachers also provide professional development to staff during Monday professional development time. During this time information obtained during off-site professional development is shared with other staff members. Parents will participate in Tuesday parent engagemnt workshops in which teachers will instruct family members regarding the reading and wriitng activities done during class, and those that can be done at home to increase literacy skills. During this time parents are instructed on how to extend the literacy skills learned in the class to the home environment. Professional Development will include an exploration of the NYS CCLS in an effort to differntiate instruction used in accordance with these rubrics. Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach Teachers September - June Lab Site and Grade Leaders September - June Classroom Teachers K-3 Parents and Students K-3 All Teachers September - June Principal, Assistant Principal and Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal and assistant principals will conduct a series of observations and walk throughs to ensure teachers are providing high quality, differentiated instruction using best teaching practices. The principal, assistant principals and coach will conduct professional development regarding a variety of literacy and ENL topics to ensure best teaching practices and differentiated instruction are used in each classroom. Classroom teachers will attend off site Teachers College Calendar Days and will then turn-key the information learned to all staff members. TC Writers workshop classroom materials will be purchased to aid teachers in developing and planning rigorous instruction. The TC Staff Developer will work with teachers in-house to provide support in this subject area. Fiction and Non-fiction texts/classroom libraries will be used for students to gain insight into each genre of writing. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February 2018, 41% of ELLs in grades K - 3 increased their writing levels by one or more benchmark, as follows:  30.8% of Kindergarten students increased their writing skills by one or more benchmark.  58.4% of first grade students increased their writing skills by one benchmark.  27.7% of second grade students increased by one benchmark, and 41.2% of third grade students increased their writing by none benchmark. The principal, assistant principal, coach and classroom teachers will continue to conduct professional development on a variety of teaching practices. Student work will be analyzed for differentiated instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure are the Teachers College narrative and informative writing rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teachers College Running Records and spelling inventory assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1. Word Study using Phonics Lessons, Month by Month Phonics, Fundations, Ready Gen Phonics 2. RtI Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Whole class and small group 1. During the school day. 3. ELA Test Preparation Program 4. Small Group and 1:1 tutoring 5. Small Group 4. After School 2. Small Group 3. Whole class and small group 1. Whole Class and Small Group 2. Small Group 2. During the school day. 3. During the school day and during the ELA After School Programs. 5. During the school day and the ELA After School Programs. 1. During the school day and the After School Math Program. 2. During the school day and the After School Math Program. 1. During the school day. 4. After School ENL Program 5. Small group scaffolded lessons using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Programs. 1. NYS Math Test Prep Program 2. Small group reteach lessons using the Go Math Program. Mathematics Science Go Math, Beginning of the year, mid-year assessments and end of the unit assessments. Teacher created beginning of the year, interim and end of year unit assessments. 1. Differentiated Instruction 1. Small Group and 1:1 2018-19 CEP 39  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher created beginning of the year, interim and end of year unitassessments. Individual student conferences as needed. 1. Differentiated Instruction. 1. Small Group and 1:1 1. During the school day. 1. Guidance Counselor 2. School Psychologist 3. Social Worker 1. Small Group and 1:1 1. During the school day. 2. 1:1 3. 1:1 2. During the school day. 3. During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 44 students attending P.S. 7 who are currently living in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students are provided breakfast in the classroom at the start of each school day. Students are provided with back packs, pencils and school supplies to enable them to continue working and learning after school. Bus service is provided to students to transport them to and from their current residence and school. Families in need of future assistance are provided with clothing, help with health issues (lice, bedbugs etc.) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Teachers will participate in weekly differentiated professional development: Teachers College, Go Math Professional Development, lab sites, in-house and off-site professional development, study groups, intra-visitation, one-on-one support by the staff developer and teacher supervisory conferences in an effort to deepen their understanding of all teaching practices such as conferring, shared writing, interactive writing and strategy lessons. All staff members will participate in professional development regarding the use of differentiated and data driven instruction to increase student performance as well as an in-depth look at the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. Through the use of this tool teachers will be instructed on how to provide ongoing needs based instruction. 2. Professional development will also include an exploration of the NYS Common Core Learning Standards in an effort to differentiate instruction based on these rubrics. 3. Classroom visits with the principal and assistant principals using walkthrough checklists and Enhancing Professional Practice; Framework for Teaching by Charlotte Danielson will provide feedback to all teachers on how to further improve classroom instruction. 4. All applicants’ resumes are screened prior to receiving an invitation to interview with the principal and assistant principals. Afterwards, the interview process includes a review of the applicant’s professional studies along with his/her knowledge and experience. During a subsequent interview a sample lesson and plan is then reviewed to assess the teacher’s ability to communicate and deliver appropriate instruction, while creating a motivating and safe rapport with students. The interview process at P.S. 7 is a rigorous one to assess each applicant’s ability to drive and administer instruction on an individual, small group and whole class level. 5. Teachers will participate in various study groups. Teachers will be provided with a content area course book to study and reflect upon. Weekly meetings will be held to share the information learned and discussed how the techniques and skills learned can be applied within all content area instruction to improve student literacy performance. 6. Teachers are provided with support through mentors. All staff members receive differentiated professional development in an effort to support their needs. Inter-visitation, grade leaders and buddy teachers allow teachers to 2018-19 CEP 43  gain feedback about curriculum, the delivery of instruction and management. Teachers meet monthly during lunch and learn to share ideas and address concerens. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Cycles of learning for teachers, assistant principals, staff developer, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, OPTs, speech therapists, parent coordinator, and staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to our students is conducted throughout the school year. Records of meetings are maintained by sign-in sheets and agendas. The following areas will be addressed during cycle of learning meetings: Literacy and math instruction, content area instruction, Charlotte Danielson rubrics, Advance Evaluation System, Child Welfare/Abuse protocol, and School Safety workshops, will be conducted for all staff members, as well as PD regarding ESL methodologies used in the classroom, as per the Jose P. mandates for a minimum of 7.5 hours. Study groups regarding literacy development and mathematical reasoning will also be given to all interested. Some of the books that will be utilized are Amazing English Handbook by Teresa Walter, Balancing Reading and Language Learning by Pauline Gibbons , Dual Language Teaching and Learning in Two Languages by Sonia Soltero, The Young Child in Mathematics by Juanita Copley and Teaching Mathematics through Problem Solving by Frank Lester and Randall Charles. 2. In-house professional development for new and experienced teachers consists of conferring, overview of the workshop model, guided reading, strategy lessons, cycle of inquiry, assessment, use of technology in the classroom, and content area learning. 3. The administration ensures that all staff receives 7.5 hours of ELL training during staff development days, in-house staff developer, in-house differentiated professional development, study groups, and Monday – Tuesday cycles of learning. Professional Development is also given regarding co-teaching. In co-teaching the following activities are discussed: Mini-lessons, independent reading and writing, shared reading, shared writing, interactive writing, read aloud, instructional format of lessons, advantages of co-teaching, activity based thematic units, differentiated instruction, and role playing. The administration ensures that all staff adheres to the above co-teaching model. 4. A variety of staff members including the principal and assistant principals, staff developer, ENL and classroom teachers participate in off-site Teachers College and Go Math staff development in an effort to gain a deeper understanding of content, and how such programs integrate the CCLS standards. Staff members viewing these programs from different perspectives (ENL, classroom, AIS, supervisory) are able to gain insight as to best ways to utilize these programs to meet the needs of our students. 5. Cluster teachers participate in off sight content area professional development and turnkey important information, curricula ideas and activities and the integration of all CCLS components during Monday – Tuesday cycle of learning time. 6. All teachers will participate in on going differentiated professional development, Teachers College, and Go Math Workshops, Lab-sites, in-house and off-site professional development, study groups, intra and inter-visitation, one-on-one support by staff developer as well as teacher supervisory conferences in an effort to deepen their understanding of all teaching practices including whole class, small group differentiated and individualized instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 44  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Mommy and Me classes are held twice per week to introduce preschoolers to the Kindergarten setting as they interact with school staff and a parent. During these sessions, children are introduced to new literature and participate in educational and social activities with other children readying themselves for Kindergarten. 2. The Parent Lending Library is open to all parents allowing them to borrow books to be read at home to their children attending our school as well as their younger siblings. This will foster a love of learning and ready our preschoolers for the classroom, making the transition to Kindergarten an easy one. 3. Upon registration all Kindergarten parents and students participate in new admit orientation. Parents receive an admission package which consists of Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey in the language of their preference, a program selection form (for ELL students) residency questionnaire, Parent/Guardian student Ethnic Identification forms and the Child and Adolescent Health Examination form. Based on the information provided by the parents, the students’ language needs are identified and an informal interview is given both in English and the students’ native language. Upon administration of the NYSITELL, all Kindergarten ENL service requirements are determined, parents are informed of the various ENL programs offered by our school and parents are given the opportunity to choose the program best suited for their child’s needs. Students are then placed into a Kindergarten class that meets their learning needs and English proficiency along with parent preferences. 4. Professional development is given to all Kindergarten teachers prior to the first day of school in September to aid teachers in the planning of instruction to better guide students towards an easy transition into Kindergarten. 5. All Kindergarten parents are invited into the classroom with their children on the first day of school to introduce them to the classroom, teacher, and books that will be read. 6. Local pre-school students along with their parents are given the opportunity to tour our school gym, library, auditorium and a model Kindergarten classroom in the spring. This serves to introduce preschoolers to their next school year and motivate student learning while alleviating their fears of the new Kindergarten surroundings. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 45  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 1. Teachers will decide upon the assessments used with their students and create their assessment checklists on their own, within cycles of inquiry and grade-wide based on the curriculum demands and needs of their students. These checklists are used to monitor progress and drive instruction. 2. Teachers meet collaboratively to agree upon and/or revise the Teachers College formative reading/writing assessments. These assessments are revised to better meet the needs and proficiencies of our students in an effort to drive instruction. 3. An assessment team consisting of the principal, assistant principals, staff developer, and teachers from each grade was formed in the spring of 2013. This team worked collaboratively to review and decide upon the state and local measures of assessment to be utilized for each year’s Advance teacher evaluation scores. The teams’ decision making progress and results were shared with the staff during professional development prior to the first day of school. 4. Although the creation of the literacy CCLS baselines and tasks was facilitated by the NYCDOE, the assessment rubric was reviewed collaboratively by each grades’ classroom teachers to gain a deeper understanding of student expectations and to come to a consensus on the grading process. The literacy baselines will also be graded collaboratively by the classroom teachers to determine the creation of differentiated instruction as well as classroom and small group assessment checklists. 5. Self-chosen differentiated cycles of inquiry allows teachers to analyze the assessment measures used with our students, as well as coordinate to create individual and small group differentiated instruction based on the results of such assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 513,160.00 233,629.00 74,420.00 0 X X X 2018-19 CEP 46 Column B Section Reference(s) 12, 17, 22 11, 14 17, 22  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5,843,544.00 X 12, 17, 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 47  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 7, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● This includes, but is not limited to, workshops and meetings where instructional strategies are discussed and modeled so that they can be replicated in the home. Such workshops and meetings include Family Literacy & Math Night, Meet the Staff Night, Bi-Monthly Principal/Parent Meetings, Weekly Workshop and ENL classes for parents. Learning materials such as Go Math and literacy games are provided to parents during the above mentioned workshops. Learning materials are shared between the school and home through the use of the Book in the Bag, Books Across America, RAZ Kids, Lexia, and Parent Lending Library Programs. ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● Inviting parents to volunteer to be part of the SLT Committee. Selected volunteers are voted on by the Parent Association to become a part of the team, where they discuss and make decisions regarding curriculum activities and programs used and participated in within our school. ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Encouraging parents to participate in their child’s class as a volunteer chaperone during trips and to participate as a volunteer in the Learning Leader Program. Parents are also invited to attend and participate in the Weekly Workshop sessions where early learning strategies are modeled and parents are encouraged to use the Parent Lending Library. ENL classes are held in order to help parents new to the country learn the language, as well as gain important information regarding immigration. This along with the principal’s open door policy fosters a shared communication among the school community. ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City and State standards and assessments along with Federal education guidelines. ● Conducting Principal/Parent Meetings, Meet the Staff Night and Parent Teacher Conferences along with Fair Share in May provides parents with needed information about the CCLS and how they relate to classroom and NYC and NYS Assessments used at our school. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Based on the Home Language Survey, providing parents with all pertinent information, regarding our school through the use of written correspondence which is translated into the major languages spoken by our student body; Spanish, Chinese and Bengali. Translation is provided by the Translation Unit and staff members as needed. ● Providing cycles of learning opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; ● Meeting with parents to exchange information and ideas. The School Leadership Team meets monthly in order for parents, teachers and administrators to share ideas, goals, activities and concerns. At these meetings parent members are informed of the types and frequency of cycles of learning and are encouraged to share their ideas for improvement and/or additional workshops. Parental Involvement and School Quality P.S. 7’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English language learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 2018-19 CEP 50  ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, accessing community and support services, and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting two one-on-one Parent Teacher Conferences as well as educational family events/activities throughout the year. ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing regular written communication between school and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 7Q, The Louis F. Simeone School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ●Using academic learning time efficiently; Students will participate in 50-60 minute reading, writing and math workshops daily. In addition, each class will receive three 45-60 minute periods of science and social studies instruction per week. ●Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; Students will be encouraged to respect and celebrate the vast cultural backgrounds of those at P.S. 7. This will be done through social studies based instruction that emphasizes family, community and culture and through the celebration of holidays and conducting International Day. ●Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; All subject area curricula are aligned to the CCLS. The Teachers College Reading/Writing Workshops and the Go Math Programs utilized at P.S. 7 are all aligned to the CCLS as well as the NYCDOE Literacy/math Teachers College and Go Math tasks our students participate in. Bulletin boards and projects are also created using the criteria of these standards. ●Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 2018-19 CEP 52  All content area instruction is CCLS aligned and our teachers are highly qualified.  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting Meet the Staff Night in September and Parent-Teacher Conferences each November and March during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this compact is related. In addition, Share Fair, participated by parents, teachers and students. ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Providing parents with opportunities to meet with teachers (either individually or by providing workshops and during Tuesday parent engagement time). ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in their child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities. Letters are sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● Surveying parents to inquire about the types of workshops needed to meet the needs of our P.S. 7 families. The SIT Team surveys the school constituency in regards to such workshops. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time (7:40 a.m. for students receiving breakfast and 8:05 a.m. for children not eating breakfast) as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Monitoring my child’s attendance by making sure they arrive to and are picked up (2:30 p.m.) by a parent/guardian (that is indicated on the emergency card) on time. ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age (suggested time is 8:30 p.m.). ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day in any language (for a minimum of 30 minutes). Books in different languages can be borrowed from the lending library. ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations, the DOE Discipline Code, and P.S. 7’s School Based Cell Phone Policy and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Every student at P.S. 7 deserves the opportunity for an equal chance to be successful. At P.S. 7Q we are committed to providing our English Language Learners with a thorough and efficient education. The Title III After and Before School Programs will be implemented in an effort to increase students’ English skills in the four language modalities; (listening, speaking, reading and writing). In addition, classes will be formed to enhance students’ math skills by developing their content vocabulary and content knowledge through a hands on math program, Moving with Math. The rationale for the before and after school program is to provide systematic, strategic, and intensive instruction in phonological and phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, fluency and writing as well as developing math knowledge and vocabulary. We will be offering a combination of programs, after school and before school in order to ensure that we are able to meet the needs of students across all grades. We will have three after school cycles for English Language Learners in grades 2 and 3. The cycle dates will be as follows: Cycle 1: 11/9/18-1/19/19, Cycle 2: 1/24/19-3/28/19 and Cycle 3: 4/26/19-6/22/19. For each cycle of nine sessions, we will be targeting English Language Learners in grades 2 on Wednesdays from 2:40-4:40. We will be targeting English Language Learners in grades 3-5 on Thursdays from 2:40-4:40. Students will be selected based on teacher recommendation along with NYSESLAT level and Independent Reading Levels. Certified ESL/Bilingual will be hired to support the students. The teacher will provide direct instruction to the students through small group instruction. In each cycle there will be a teacher student ratio of approximately 1:15 in order to provide the students with small group instruction that will maximize their learning. We will be targeting students who are Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding students and who are considered Benchmark Level 1 and 2 based on Teachers College Running Records and ongoing formative assessments. All teachers have been trained in ESL methodologies through professional development. We will also have an Early Bird program for first grade students beginning on 11/21/18 - 1/16/19. First grade students will either attend a Monday-Wednesday session or Tuesday-Thursday session. We will have an Early Bird program for Kindergarten students beginning on 1/23/17-3/27/17. Kindergarten students will either attend a Monday-Wednesday session or Tuesday-Thursday session. We will have a second cycle of the Early Bird morning program from 4/25/19-6/22/19. This morning program will take place twice a week for 45 minutes. The ratio for both morning programs will be kept at 1:10 in order to provide small group differentiated instruction.Students will receive explicit multi-sensory phonics instruction through Fundations. Students will receive guided reading using guided reading books from Fountas and Pinnell leveled readers . Teachers will be exposing students to rigorous texts using the Junior Great Books for close reading. Students will also use Headsprout and Lexia on laptops as a supplemental technology literacy program. We will be using the math program: Moving with Math to develop math vocabulary and math content knowledge. Each program will be supplemented with books in the major native languages of the students: Spanish, Chinese, and Bengali. High quality classroom libraries and the use of technology will support our goals and will be used along with the above mentioned teaching practices. Informal assessments will include pre-assessment, post assessment and the language acquisition checklists to measure growth. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development for the teachers involved in the programs is embedded in our ongoing PD plan. The rationale of the professional development will be to increase English Language Learners' English skills in the four language modalities; (listening, speaking, reading and writing) during literacy instruction and content area instruction as measured by ongoing assessments, teacher observations, checklists and progress on the NYSESLAT from year to year with the goal being English proficiency. 1. Teachers will also participate in ongoing professional development in the following areas: Differentiated Instruction to meet the needs of English Language Learners, high Order thinking questioning, academic vocabulary, and ENL methodology. 2. We will provide professional development to the teachers in using the new Language Arts Progressions and the Native Language Progressions. 3. Our TC staff developer will specifically model ELL strategies in the Teachers College workshop model during labsites. All of the teachers who are teaching the Title III program are involved in the Teachers College professional development days. We currently have 22 staff development days with a Teachers College Staff Developer. During each staff development day, classroom teachers, ENL push in teachers, self contained ENL teachers, and dual language teachers meet in a lab site to implement various teaching methodologies. 4. Teachers of English Language Learners will engage in self directed professional development through Cycles of Inquiry focused on problems of practice with English Language Learners. Teams of teachers of English Language Learners choose a problem of practice using data from their students. They then research different teaching strategies to address the problem of practice. Each team will have a team leader. 5. We will be sending the teachers involved in the program to high quality professional learning opportunities offered through Queens North Field Support. 6. We will be hiring a consultant to provide professional development to teachers of English Language Learners, specifically those who teach during the Title III Before or After School programs. 7. Teachers who are teaching during the morning Early Bird program and/or the after school programs will receive one hour of professional development prior to the start of the program. The aforementioned materials will be kept in a Professional Development binder which is kept in the main office. We will track the professional development through presentations, agendas, and sign in sheets. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parents of our English Language Learners will be provided with workshops to better understand and clarify the ENL program design at P.S. 7. We will notify parents through letters which are translated into the main languages that are spoken at the school: Spanish, Chinese, and Bengali. The parents of the participating students will be invited to attend workshops on some of the following topics: How to help your children at home, Family Workshops on different educational topics (Common Core Standards, Modeling of Shared Reading, Read Aloud, Games and Oral language Development, NYSESLAT) and Math and Literacy Family Night. These workshops will be provided in school from 8:30-9:30 once a month by our parent coordinator and a hired consultant. Our parent coordinator conducts weekly sessions on English as a New Language in order to support our parents in learning the language. Available staff will support the translation services during these workshops. We maintain records of these events through sign in sheets, agendas, and copies of the presentation. We also have a Lending Library which contains books in different languages for parents of Title III students). Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 44518.38  Per session  Per diem Purchased services Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Cycle 1, 2, & 3: After school Grades 2: 3 teachers x 9 sessions x 2 hours x 3 cycles X $55.23 = $8947.26 Grade 3: 4 teachers X 9 sessions X 2 hours X 3 cycles X 55.23 = $11929.68 Grade 1: 10 teachers (5 Monday-Wednesday teachers and 5 Tuesday-Thursday teachers) X 18 sessions X .75 hours X 55.23 X 2 cycles = 14912.1 Kindergarten: 10 teachers (5 Monday-Wednesday teachers and 5 Tuesday-Thursday teachers) X 18 sessions X .75 hours X $55.23 = 7456.05 Professional Development: Each teacher involved receives 1 hour of PD prior to the start of the program: 1270.29 2018-19 CEP 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. We will be hiring an educational consultant to provide professional development to ENL/Bilingual certified teachers including those teaching in the Title II programs. Supplemental materials used for the programs - Moving with Math, Fundations, Fountas and Pinnell Guided Reading books, Junior Great Books, books in different languages, Purchase licenses for Headsprout which will be used during the Before school and After school Title III Programs. N/A Parental Engagement: We will be hiring an educational consultant to provide workshops to parents of English Language Learners N/A  High quality staff 7509 and curriculum development contracts. 13705.36 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2000 Travel Other N/A $7353.26 TOTAL $75,086.00 2018-19 CEP 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Louis F. Simeone Borough Queens School Number 7 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sara Tucci Coach Kathy Hartney ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Orit Sperber Teacher/Subject Area Erika Liriano/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Leigh Pena/Dual Language Related-Service Provider Nancy Arundell/Speech Teacher Superintendent type Assistant Principal Naomi Landau Coach type here School Counselor Ruth Gonzalez Parent Kathy Bueno Parent Coordinator Marjorie Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 13 0 10 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 2 18 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1004 Total number of ELLs 470 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 46.81% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 2008 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 7 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments our school uses to guide instructional planning in English include the TCRWP Primary Assessments: Concepts of Print, Letter ID and Letter Sound recognition, High Frequency Word Lists, and Running Records (administered a minimum of five times a year in grades 1-3 and four times a year in kindergarten), Fundations Unit Tests (for word study), and Interim On-Demand writing assessments. Dual Language classes use Estrellita (Grades K&1), Senderos (Grades 2&3), Palabras a su Paso (Grades 2&3), and the Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment System to guide instructional planning in Spanish. Additionally, the teachers have created checklists to be used daily to address the NYS Learning Standards. Informal reading, writing, listening, and speaking assessments are ongoing through one to one conferences and small group work. Student writing is assessed by using Teachers College writing rubrics (informational, opinion, and narrative) in order to determine students' areas of strengths and weaknesses across different traits of writing. 2018-19 CEP 62  Curriculum-embedded assessments include pre and post unit writing assessments as well as guided reading notes and Go Math ELL-Specific student tasks are implemented. These assessments inform instructional planning by determining high leverage target areas of needs for ELLs. For example, our primary spelling inventory results indicate that our ELLs need instructional support in building phonemic awareness, and our running record assessments indicate that they need help in using visual cues when reading. Thus , our instructional planning includes a focus on implementing word study in the classroom in small, differentiated groups. There is also an increased emphasis on shared reading and writing using ELL strategies. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are provided with structured times throughout the year to look collaboratively at student data and discuss findings. We have a school-wide data collection system on Google Drive and TC Assessment Pro where teachers enter the data at least 4 times throughout the year. The data are analyzed by grade and individual class by administration, and teachers analyze data by individual students. Based on the data, decisions are made for students who should be recommended for our early bird program, extended day program, Response to Intervention , and Saturday Academy. Teachers use the data to design academic tasks and learning experiences that enable all students to access the curriculum. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Currently we use the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL as a baseline to determine students' level of performance across the four modalities: reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We use the EDAT to determine students who are at risk. Additionally, we use the NYC Math performance assessment in order to determine students' math content knowledge and mathematical practices. Students' literacy performance is assessed using Running Records and On Demand writing assessments. In the Dual Language Classes, baseline reading, writing and math assessments are also given in Spanish and are analyzed for areas of need in accordance with the Bilingual Common Core Initiative New Language Arts Progressions and the Home Language Arts Progressions. In ENL self-contained classrooms, students may write their on-demand writing pieces in their Home Language, and teachers analyze the writing based on a translation provided and what they can identify from writing conventions (example: does the writing sample show stamina and volume to any extent?) Areas of need that have been discovered: phonological awareness, difficulty with writing conventions, a need to increase volume and stamina in writing and story-telling. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the beginning of the year, the ENL department provides teachers with individual students' summaries and class summaries from the EDAT. The data from baseline assessments determine students who will receive RtI, Early Intervention, or Saturday Academy support. Additionally, the teachers use the data to design differentiated instruction in the class. Teachers are expected to engage in progress monitoring of all students who demonstrate academic difficulty with a certain concept. The administration meets monthly with the RtI team to monitor student progress. The RtI Team consists of several teachers who also check in periodically with classroom teachers in order to monitor interventions and determine whether or not students must begin a higher tier of RtI. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school begins with the Universal Screening, which is administered to all students in September. As the Universal Screening, our school uses TC Running Records, the Primary Spelling Inventory, and the High Frequency Word List assessments. The following assessments are used for kindergarten and first grade: The TCWRP Concepts of Print, Letter sounds, and Letter ID primary assessments. TC On-Demand Writing pieces are also analyzed using TC Common Core aligned rubrics to determine specific areas of focus in writing and set individual student goals. The Universal Screen is used to flag students whose literacy skills are below grade level. English Language Learners are flagged as needing additional support in literacy in conjunction with language services. Teachers use both formative and summative assessment data to determine differentiated instructional groups, individual student learning styles, and student learning preferences. Using student work products and assessment data, teachers revise, adapt, and extend academic tasks in order to make the curriculum accessible to ELLs. Tier I Instruction: English Language Learners receive Tier I instruction by the general education teacher and a certified 2018-19 CEP 63  ENL teacher. We have two models for Tier I instruction of English Language Learners. We have several self-contained English as a New Language classes taught by a certified ENL teacher as well as classes using the push-in model. An ENL teacher pushes into English classes in order to provide the ENL services to those students in need of them, for the time mandated as determined by students' NYSITELL and NYSESLAT level. Both the classroom teacher and ENL teacher provide differentiated targeted instruction based on both the literacy and language needs of the students. Teachers use research-based practices to best meet the needs of linguistically diverse populations, using a curriculum that teaches both language and literacy across content areas. Lessons are made meaningful through hands-on and authentic experiences. ELLs are given instruction that is cognitively challenging, but with instructional supports such as picture cues, total physical response, peer support, and scaffolded instruction. English language learners develop language through conversations with the teacher and with peers. Tier II Instruction: ELLs who have not shown sufficient progress in Tier I are brought to the attention of the RtI team. The RtI team consists of the school building principal, two assistant principals, two Academic Intervention Support teachers, and one guidance counselor. Using data from the documentation of Tier I instruction and the Universal Screen, the RtI team determines if the ELL student needs more intensive support in Tier II. We use a pull-out/push-in RtI model. ELLs who are determined to be in need of more intensive differentiated instruction will receive Tier II instruction three times a week for a minimum of 30 minutes in small groups of no more than five students from a highly qualified teacher. As part of the Tier II instruction, we use The Wright Group Early Reading Intervention Program, which is a research based literacy program addressing the following literacy components: sight word instruction, comprehension, phonics, vocabulary instruction, and fluency. Additionally, in order to meet the language needs of ELLs we have incorporated Mondo, which is an oral language development program. ELLs are monitored for progress once a month and changes are made to instruction based on the assessments. The RtI team meets monthly to discuss student progress. Parents are notified in writing that their child has been placed in Tier II. The notification letters have been translated into Spanish, Chinese, and Bengali. Tier III Instruction: English Language Learners who are not thriving after a minimum of nine weeks in Tier II are then brought to the attention of the RtI team. The RtI team discusses data from the progress monitoring assessments given during Tier II. The RtI team uses the data to discuss how Tier III interventions can help the student overcome his/her difficulties. We use a pull-out RtI model. ELLs who are determined to be in need of more intensive differentiated instruction will receive Tier III instruction three times a week for 45 minutes in small groups of no more than three students from a highly qualified teacher. As part of the Tier III instruction, we use The Wright Group Early Reading Intervention Program, which is a research based literacy program addressing the following literacy components: sight word instruction, comprehension, phonics, vocabulary instruction, and fluency. Additionally, in order to meet the language needs of Ells we have incorporated Mondo, which is an oral language development program. ELLs are monitored for progress once a month and changes are made to instruction based on the assessments. The RtI team meets bi-monthly to discuss student progress. Parents are notified in writing of their child's placement in Tier III. The notification letters have been translated into Chinese, Spanish and Bengali. If the student continues to demonstrate persistent difficulties despite the additional interventions in Tier II and Tier III over a suitable period of time, the child is recommended to our School Based Support Team (SBST) in order to determine if the child is in need of a comprehensive multidisciplinary evaluation. However, our school views RtI as a problem solving model, rather than a special education pre-evaluation and makes every effort to determine specific language/literacy challenges faced by individual English Language Learners who are not making sufficient progress. We believe in a focused problem-solving model that provides students with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction and ongoing progress monitoring that is created to meet their individual language/literacy needs 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We currently use the NYSESLAT results to evaluate and inform ELL programs. We determine how many students we have at each of the language proficiency levels compare these numbers with the previous years' numbers. We then look at the individual modality strands of the NYSELAT exam and determine the areas of highest need based on the scores. When we know which modality is showing the lowest numbers--we set our instructional focus for ELLs. In the past year, we determined the area of focus to be in Writing and Word Study. We also study the itemized analysis of ELA and Math State tests to determine the areas of highest need for our ELL students and provide teachers with additional resources and support to meet this need. This past year, our analysis of the data indicates a need to provide more time for the implementation of Word Study. 2018-19 CEP 64  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the year, the ENL department provides teachers with individual students' summaries and class summaries from the EDAT. The data from the EDAT and NYSESLAT assessment determine students who will receive RtI, Early Intervention, or Extended Day support. Additionally, the teachers use the data to form instructional groups within the classroom. Additionally, based on the data, we the Instructional Cabinet discusses curricular changes that would best support the needs of the students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL program.We have both self contained English as a New Language classes which are taught by a dually certified ENL and common branch teacher. The self contained English as a New Language classes consist of a heterogeneous group of entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding students. Instruction is delivered by a teacher who is dually certified in English as a Second Language and Common Branch. We also have a push in model which consists of an ENL certified teacher pushing into ELA instruction and providing stand alone ENL based on the mandated minutes. Classes in which a push in ENL teachers provides instruction are heterogeneous classes with both ELL students and English Proficient students. Instruction in all content areas are provided through the workshop model. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Dual Language classes are heterogeneously mixed classes consisting of 50% English Language Learners and 50% English Proficient (EP) students. The language allocation for content and literacy instruction in English and the target language is approximately 50/50. ELLs are provided with mandated ENL as per CR Part 154.2; EPs are provided with language arts in the target language.As of the 2017-2018 academic year, our dual language program in kindergarten - second grade is implemented using a side by side model with the language of instruction alternating daily. The dual language program in third grade uses a self-contained model alternating the language of instruction daily. The self-contained dual language teacher is certified in Common Branch with a Bilingual extension. In the side by side classes, the English instruction teacher is dually certified in Common Branch and ENL and the Spanish instruction teacher is certified in Common Branch with a Bilingual extension. Instruction in all content areas is provided through the TCRWP Workshop model.In our side by side classes: There are two separate classrooms for instruction in each of the two languages. The two groups of students are linguistically integrated. The groups move from one language classroom to the other according to the alternating day pattern.In our self-contained class: There is one teacher who provides instruction in both languages determined by the language of the day. The classroom contains instructional materials in both languages and is organized so that the language of instruction is clearly designated using the color code: red for Spanish; blue for English. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided for all ELLs according to CR Part 154.2. The Dual Language teachers are certified in Common Branch, Bilingual Extension and/or ENL and these classes 2018-19 CEP 65  function as Self Contained ENL classes. We have five certified ENL teachers who push in to work collaboratively with the classroom teacher according to the class organization for either 360 minutes, 180 minutes, or 90 minutes per week. The Self-Contained ENL classes are taught by teachers who hold dual certification in Common Branch and TESOL. Students receive the mandated number of units of support for ELLs as per New York State CR Part-154.2. All ELLs are grouped in classes according to mandated number of minutes. Self contained ENL classes are heterogeneously grouped.a. Students in the Free Standing English as a New Language program receive all instruction in English. The New York State Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154.2 determines how many units of ENL instruction each student should receive according to his or her English proficiency level as measured by the NYSITELL and/or the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT).• All students are provided with high-quality instruction in English as a New Language utilizing scaffolding strategies in the delivery of each lesson.• Entering and emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Both Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand alone ENL per week and 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA. • Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction per week.• Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week within the content areas. Instruction is differentiated and scaffolded to ensure academic success.• The workshop model of instruction is used in order to provide opportunities for utilizing specific second language teaching methodologies. All ELL students are grouped within the classes according to their language proficiency levels to meet their specific instructional needs. All students in the Dual Language program develop their second-language skills while learning all content knowledge in both languages. Content area instruction is taught by both the Dual Language classroom teachers in Spanish/English and the cluster teacher in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In both the Dual Language and Free Standing English as a New Language Program, the instruction is differentiated for entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding with the use of scaffolding, extensive modeling, and other ENL strategies. These strategies may include activating prior knowledge, total physical response, making connections to experiences, building new knowledge, using visuals and realia. Teachers will provide scaffolding at different levels, such as teacher-centered activities, interactive and shared activities, as well as students’ independent and small group work supported by teacher conferences. In the Dual Language Program, students are expected to build academic skills in their dominant language (L1) and ultimately transfer these skills to the target language (L2). English Language Learners and English Proficient (EP) students are linguistically integrated for all content area instruction. During the literacy block, the components of the balanced literacy program are introduced in both the student’s first language and second language according to an alternating language pattern: The language of instruction alternates daily. Teachers develop lessons that include verbal and nonverbal cues, visual aids, manipulatives, hands-on activities, gestures, eye movement, small group instruction, and so forth to convey meaning.-The skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, seeing/observing and thinking are integrated in authentic and meaningful language activities.-Teachers use authentic songs, poems, literature, rhymes, and artifacts to teach language and culture.-Teachers use a variety of effective feedback techniques including elicitation, metalinguistic clues, repetition, and nonverbal cues to foster language develop in both languages.-Dual Language teachers take into consideration children’s developmental learning needs as well as language proficiency levels in both languages, structuring the language and delivery of instruction appropriately.- Teachers partner newly admitted students with students who speak the same language in order to provide support in adjusting to the new environment. While also partnering with a student who speaks the target language so that students may learn from one another. In side by side classes:-Teachers routinely discuss formative assessment and student progress in order to co-plan and build on student learning in the respective classrooms.All of our educational programs for ELLs embody challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that prepare ELLs to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in the language of instruction. In order to accomplish this goal, programs for ELLs at P.S.7 focus on several key principles:•All ELLs are provided with standard-based instruction in both content and literacy areas aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. In both programs, the following methods are used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the CCLS: • Small Group Instruction – Daily with various groups within the reading, writing and math workshops. This may consist of guided reading, strategy lessons, shared reading, word work, read aloud, shared writing, story telling, and dramatization. At this time ELLs receive small group instruction, one-on-one conferences, partner reading, etc.• Math Workshop -Students interact with the math content by using manipulatives and 2018-19 CEP 66  acting out real-world mathematical problems. Teachers also scaffold learning by previewing content specific vocabulary with English Language Learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, Dual Language teachers have been provided with the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Evaluation System in Spanish (Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura) to administer running records at least five times throughout the year and submit assessment results to administration for review and analysis. Teachers are expected to group all students for Spanish guided reading lessons based on the miscue analysis of the Spanish running records. Teachers are also provided with time to assess the students' foundational literacy skills using the Spanish reading program, Estrellita (in K & 1), as well as Senderos and the word study program, Palabras a Su Paso (in 2 & 3 grades) and are also expected to submit and discuss this data with administration on a quarterly basis. Third grade Dual Language students are administered the Examen de Lectura en Español (ELE) as a summative assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently we have no SIFE students. In order to meet their needs we have the following plan of action in place: Classrooms will have a Leveled libraries that ranges from two levels below to one level above the SIFE student’s identified reading level. The Guidance Counselor will provide an emotional as well as affective factors profile of the SIFE student. SIFE students will be screened for learning disabilities. Cultural and family background will be addressed for a complete picture of SIFE student. SIFE students will receive differentiated instruction – grouping by ability, need(s), and targeted skills. SIFE student will be serviced through ENL and the RTI Tiered Intervention b. Newcomers: All ELLs are provided with the Common Core Learning Standard instruction in both content and literacy areas. The language arts instructional component is delivered using instruction in English with the use of ENL methodology. Instruction is differentiated for ELL students with the use of scaffolding, extensive modeling, and other ENL strategies. These strategies may include activating prior knowledge, building new experiences, using visuals and vocabulary enrichment. Teachers scaffold at different levels during the reading workshop, and during the writing workshop. Teachers develop oral and written language through shared reading and shared writing language experiences. Teachers provide an anxiety-free environment by pairing newcomers with buddies who speak the same language or help them learn English through interpersonal communication and an after school and/or Saturday Title III program. c. Our plan for Developing ELLs receiving services is the same as above. All ELLs are provided with the Common Core Learning Standard instruction in both content and literacy areas. The language arts instructional component is delivered using instruction in English with the use of ENL methodology. Instruction is differentiated for ELL students with the use of scaffolding, extensive modeling, and other ENL strategies. These strategies may include activating prior knowledge, building new experiences, using visuals and vocabulary enrichment. Teachers scaffold at different levels during the reading workshop, and during the writing workshop through differentiated instruction. d. We do not have long-term ELLs that have completed 6 years. We are a K - 3 school. e. Our plan for former ELLs is to provide students with differentiated instruction with the use of scaffolding techniques and ENL methodologies. The students receive guided reading and strategy lessons in order to continue improving reading and writing skills. e. Former ELLs receive, for the next two years, testing accommodations on City and State exams as well as in classroom assessments. The students are invited to join afterschool and Saturday Academy programs. These students receive individualized/small group instruction by classroom, after school Title III program and ENL teachers. Former ELLs continue to receive the time and a half testing accommodation for all tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 67  P.S. 7 differentiates instruction and adapts curriculum to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. ELL students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ENL are provided with an instructional plan which adheres to the IEP mandates. Short and long term goals are adhered to. Well equipped literacy centers, leveled libraries, differentiated instruction, small group instruction with the use of scaffolding techniques at different levels as well as extensive modeling are provided. Language Acquisition Checklists are used to drive content area instruction as well as language development. Reading instruction includes the explicit teaching of skills such as: reading comprehension, retelling of a story using key details, main idea, writing about reading, the sequence of a story and character development. Special education teachers use the promethean board, ipads, and laptops in order to promote students active participation. Services in ENL are provided according to CR-Part 154.2 based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores through the push-in model during content area instruction in order to accelerate English language development. ENL-SWDs teachers develop Tier II vocabulary and sentence structure.We use RAZ Kids in literacy in order to provide students with an auditory and visual representation of levels books. Students also have individual Go Math Think Central accounts in which they receive differentiated support based on their needs. Think Central provides videos on math concepts to reinforce in class instruction. Teachers embed content area instruction (science, social studies, math, art, and music) throughout the day. Teachers use hands on materials and visuals in order to support content area instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELL-SWDs have reorganized their schedule in order to ensure that there is a block of time devoted to shared reading. Additionally, based on teacher recommendation, we mainstream students into general education classes during areas of students' strengths. Teachers choose culturally relevant literature in order to scaffold knowledge. Many students are identified for flexible programming options in order for them to have access to the least restrictive environment. For example, a student in an ICT classroom may push in to a self-contained ENL classroom to receive ENL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention program utilized at PS 7 for ELLS in ELA follows the Response to Intervention tiered program aimed at closing the achievement gap for our at risk learners. Entering and emerging ELLs receive support developing their oral language through shared reading and through language experience approaches. Students develop concept vocabulary through realia and authentic experiences. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive targeted literacy/language support in the classroom by the classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and AIS teachers. This intervention support consists of a variety of supports included shared reading, Fundations, oral language development, guided reading, shared writing, and interactive writing. Students are taught individually and in small groups. In addition to the support from teachers, students work collaboratively with students who are more proficient in the English language. Students also have access to the online program RAZ-Kids. RAZ-Kids is a leveled reading program. Students access the program both in school and at home. English language learners who continue to need more intensive support in literacy (students who are a year or more below grade level) receive Tier II instruction by either an ENL teacher or an AIS teacher. In order to promote academic achievement in reading, the RtI team members were carefully selected in order to include a range of experts. The RtI team consists of: The Principal, Assistant Principals, AIS teachers, ENL teachers, the bilingual school psychologist, Guidance Counselor and the Literacy Staff Developer. Students who do not make sufficient progress in Tier II as demonstrated by running records, interim assessments and ongoing formative assessments enter into Tier III. The program that is used for both Tier II and Tier III RtI is called the Wright Group Early Reading Intervention Program. The Wright Group Reading Intervention Program is a research based program consisting of fluency, vocabulary, comprehension, and phonics. Additionally, Tier II and Tier III instruction consists of an oral language development program by Mondo. Students who receive Tier II instruction are pulled out in small groups of no more than five two times a week for 45 minutes. Students who receive Tier III instruction are pulled out in small groups of no more than three two times a week for 45 minutes. The extended day and Title III after-school programs offered at P.S. 7 are aimed at helping students meet and exceed the NYS Common Core Learning Standards in literacy and math. Title III Early Bird, after school, and Saturday program ELA, ENL and math are provided to first, second and third grade students. During the spring, the Kindergartners are provided with an Early bird program in ELA and ENL. Students are taught individually and in small groups in order to assist 2018-19 CEP 68  them in building basic language skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Extended day is geared towards At-Risk students. It reinforces and reviews strategies and skills taught in the classroom to improve academic performance through one-on-one and small group instruction. Guidance counseling addresses emotional, social and behavioral needs/weaknesses in order to improve student achievement. This is facilitated in each grade level, one-on-one and in small groups during the school day. At-Risk services are provided by Guidance Counselors on an as-needed basis. The occupational therapist and physical therapist meet with students during the school day individually in order to meet their needs as specified on each child's IEP. At-Risk's speech is offered to students in grades K-3 during the school day individually and in small groups to meet the needs specified on each child's IEP. In math, teachers provide small group and one on one instruction to students who need academic intervention. We currently use Go Math, which provides options for differentiation such as re-teach, Tier II instruction, Tier III instruction, and enrichment activities. In social studies, teachers provide small group and one on one instruction to students who need academic intervention.In science, teacher provide small group and one on one instruction to students who need academic intervention. Dual language teachers provide small group differentiated instruction to support Spanish speaking students who are struggling. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In order to improve writing performance we will continue using Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study. We will provide more focused staff development in implementing the writing units. Additionally, we will be incorporating Fundations into second grade classes. In dual language classes, we purchased a Spanish grammar and word study program: Senderos and Palabras a Su Paso in order to ensure consistency across the grades. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We closed our Transitional Bilingual Program because parents requested Dual Language instead. Research also indicates that Dual Language immersion programs have greater benefits to establishing biliteracy, bilingualism and multicultural awareness. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P. S 7 is committed to ensuring that ELL students are provided opportunities to achieve the same educational goals and standards as the general education population. ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. Parents of ELL students are notified of the Title III after school program in Literacy, Math and ENL. The teachers working in the literacy, math and ENL after school program are mastered and fully certified. Fundations in grades K, 1 and 2 is currently in use in our ENL after school/Saturday programs. Teachers complete a recommendation form in order to identify students who should be invited to this program. Parents/guardians of students who have been recommended into this program receive an invitation letter/permission slip translated into the preferred language (English, Spanish, Chinese and Bengali). We track students who have been recommended to the program as they return the permission slip. Students who don't return the permission slip received a second follow up letter. This program provides systematic, strategic and intensive instruction in phonological and phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, fluency and writing. The after school math program incorporates vocabulary development through the introduction and use of mathematical sight words and terminology. Oral language development is enhanced through the practice of problem solving and the sharing of strategies used to solve math questions. Reading and writing skills will also be improved as students strategize and solve problems based on the Common Core State Standards. The goals of this program include: Increasing the use of manipulatives and games to enhance problem solving skills, collecting math data to provide more small group partner work, increasing higher order thinking skills through the use of read aloud with accountable talk and problem solving. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At P.S. 7 technology plays a big role in the students’ academic life. Teachers have been provided with Promethean boards and laptops to aid in the teaching of math, reading, writing, social studies, science and phonics. All teachers at P.S. 7 have been provided with technology programs such as Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., Brain Pop ESL, Learning A-Z, Raz-Kids , and Reading A-Z . Administrators, lead teachers and staff developers, consistently model teaching strategies and learning process for specific grades.The use of laptops with visual clues to help students understand and interpret word problems through interactive 2018-19 CEP 69  smartboards. As a school recognized for implementing technology, we have found that the computer is a supplemental teaching tool that can facilitate learning in a variety of ways. It plays an integral part in providing ELL students with valuable language experiences as they learn a new language. Laptops for the students, scanners, promethean boards are used to enhance ENL instruction. Laptops are used to write stories, internet research, podcasting, and blogging. Scanners are used to scan stories and lessons onto the Promethean boards. The laptops will allow students to become active learners through the use of technology in a one-on-one environment. Laptops provide a rich, contextual environment for ELL students as they learn vocabulary in context along with visual clues to help them understand.In math ELL students are provided with visuals to aid their comprehension of mathematical vocabulary. Additionally, students are provided with concrete manipulatives such as counters, base 10 blocks, clocks, and number grids in order to support their understanding of abstract mathematical concepts. In science students are provided with hands on experiences in order to understand scientific concepts. In order to support language development, ELLs are provided with sentence starters to be used as models in both writing and speaking. This facilitates the ELLs development of the English Language.We all provide native language materials through our "Lending Library" in which families can borrow books translated into the different language represented at our school. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Dual Language Program, teachers administer baseline, midline and endline assessments in both English and Spanish. Home language support is assessed by analyzing the results of the English and Spanish running records, TCRWP Primary Assessments (Letters, High Frequency Words, Concepts of Print) in English and Spanish, and On-Demand Writing samples (in both English and Spanish). Teachers use the results of home language assessments to design and deliver developmentally appropriate targeted instruction in the form of guided groups, shared reading, writing and math, one-to-one support through conferring and coaching students, and differentiated center activities. Teachers also host parent workshops where they model strategies and provide materials and resources for parents to use at home with their child to support home language development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are instructed using curriculum that is aligned with the NYS Learning Standards: Teachers College, Go Math, Fundations, and the content area scopes and sequences. All curriculum has tiered instructional practices as well as ENL-specific strategies that teachers may use to scaffold instruction for ELLs and provide them with appropriate challenge. School leaders and staff developers ensure that teachers are provided with professional development centered around how to design and implement differentiated learning experiences that enable ELL's to access the curriculum in accordance with the NYS Learning Standards for their age and grade levels. Teachers are taught how to analyze student work products to decide on high leverage areas of need, and create a plan of action that is differentiated to meet the needs of individual and groups of students. Ultimately, all instruction is monitored using the Charlotte Danielson Framework, in order to ensure that all students are provided with multiple entry points and academic tasks that give them multiple opportunities to engage in high-level thinking. In addition, ELLs are placed in grade appropriate classes based on their age. Leveled books are also provided in the Content Area based on grade level. We are using Santillana Spotlight on English during the after school Title III program, which is a program for ELLs based on their grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We currently share our space with a District 75 school. We communicate regularly during Campus and Safety meetings. During the campus meetings, we discuss school events. We also keep a communal calendar for our shared spaces such as the auditorium. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our pupil accounting secretary meets individual parents (using translators as needed) to provide an overview of school policies and procedures. Our parent coordinator, Marjorie Rodriguez meets individually with parents and provides workshops. Students receive support from our guidance counselors in adjusting to the new school and new culture. Within the classroom, students are paired with buddies (who speak the same language when possible) in order to ease the transition 2018-19 CEP 70  into the new environment. Teachers will provide picture support of school symbols, rooms (bathroom, nurse, cafeteria), important people, etc in order to provide a non verbal form of communication. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At present, we do not have any language electives in our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. In third grade we use a self contained dual language model. In kindergarten-second grade, we have two side-by-side dual language classes. We follow the Alternating Day model in which one day the language of instruction is conducted entirely in English and the next day it is conducted entirely in Spanish. The students receive an equal amount of instructional days in each language (Spanish/English). The students are not separated for language instruction. English proficient and native language proficient students are paired to receive instruction in two languages. These classes are heterogeneously grouped. EPs and ELLs are integrated for 100% of the instructional day. Students alternate each day between English and Spanish instruction. The classroom teachers in the self contained dual language classes teach ELA, math, science, and social studies. We have one certified ENL teacher and one certified bilingual teacher in the two side by side dual language kindergarten classes. The certified bilingual teacher solely teaches in Spanish. b. Social studies and science instruction are provided in both languages by the Dual Language classroom teacher(s) and in English by the cluster teachers. c. Dual language teachers set up the classroom so that English and Spanish are separated by color. The students are taught that a specific color corresponds to a given language (Red is for Spanish; Blue is for English). In side by side, classrooms are set up so that the English side mirrors the Spanish side. For both languages, teachers have ELA word walls, math word walls, and content area word walls. d. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages alternated by day (One day English Emergent literacy; the next day Spanish Emergent literacy). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development for teachers, assistant principals, literacy coach, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, science teachers, social studies teachers, art teachers, physical education teachers, technology teachers, psychologists, OPTs, speech therapists, parent coordinator, and staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to English Language Learners are conducted throughout the school year. Records of meetings are maintained by sign-in sheets and agendas. Professional development occurs on Monday, during professional development as well as during Election day and Chancellor's Conference days. Per diem subs will be hired to cover ENL/Dual Language and Bilingual teachers when attending off site and in-house professional development for ELLs (DL conference, In-house PD with DL and Self-Contained ENL teachers).We plan to offer the following workshops throughout the 2017-2018 school year: -Integrating Language and Content 2018-19 CEP 71  Instruction for English Language Learners-Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners using Fundations-ENL Methodology and Strategies for Close Reading -Using the EDAT Data to Plan for Instruction-The importance of Meaningful Context-Embedded Tasks to Support the Language and Cognitive Needs of ELLs-Using the Bilingual Common Core to Scaffold Instruction in the Dual Language and ENL Classroom-Differentiated Instruction to Meet the Individual Needs of ELLs-The Use of Shared Reading to Improve the Oral Language Development of ELLs (specifically entering and emergent ELLs)-Using the Language Progressions to Move English Language Learners-Understanding the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and the Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP)-Providing ELL Readers with the Support they Need to Take the ELA, NYSESLAT, Science, and Math exams-Cultural Sensitivity toward ELL Students and the Importance of Implementing a Multicultural Curriculum-Study groups will be conducted specific to the needs of ELL’s focusing on differentiating strategies to implement during Teachers College Writing Workshop, Close Reading, and Go Math. -Using the NYSESLAT performance level descriptions across the four modalities in order to differentiate instruction. Additionally, administrators, lead teachers, and staff developers will consistently model strategies to meet the needs of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The administration ensures that all staff receives the mandated time (5.25 hours per year across 5 years for all teachers and 17.5 hours per year across 5 years for bilingual education/ENL teachers) for ELL training during staff development days, in-house differentiated professional development, and study groups. The agendas and attendance are kept in a PS 7 Professional Development binder. Teachers maintain their individual records of professional development. At least five times a year, Dual Language/ENL teachers are also sent to full-day off-site professional development provided by the Division of English Language and Student Support that focuses on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Dual Language Program Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, and Dual Language Teachers) host a Dual Language Information Session where the goals of the program, language acquisition research, and curriculum are discussed. Dual Language classes prepare a short presentation for the parents exhibiting what they have learned. Translators are present for all parent meetings in the following languages: Chinese, Bengali, and Spanish. Teachers also schedule individual conferences with parents of ELLs in order to discuss their child's language development progress and language development needs in all content areas. Teachers use Tuesday Parental Engagement time to meet individually with students' parents. Teachers keep individual records of meetings/phone calls/letters in order to ensure that all ELL parents/guardians meet at least once individually with the teachers. In order to meet the preferred language communication of the parents/guardians we provide translation either through designated translators in the school or by using the NYCDOE translation system. School administrators and ENL teachers provide workshops on the NYSESLAT and interactive ways to help your child to improve listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ongoing workshops are provided for parents in order to help them acquire the skills needed to assist their children in the development of print strategies and phonemic awareness, which are essential for student’s success. The expertise of staff members including literacy, math, and technology experts will be utilized in workshop presentations. The ELL parents are also involved in Parent Association activities held at the school, such as picture day, family nights, and holiday celebrations. Parents 2018-19 CEP 72  of all grades have the opportunity to meet their child’s teacher at “Meet the Staff Night” held each September. During this forum parents learn how to help their child meet the standards in all curriculum areas. Parents of new admits across the grades are invited to the school and receive information regarding curriculum, instructional methods, student requirements, and parent support. P.S 7 holds orientation sessions for parents of new admits to ensure that parents can make informed and educated choices regarding the language services their children receive. In addition, parents are welcomed to attend parent teacher conferences twice a year (Fall/Spring) as well as the Family Share Fair held in May. Every week, during Parent Engagement, parents are invited to meet with their child's teacher to discuss progress. Teachers and staff members have also used this allotted time to conduct presentations to groups of parents on how to help their child at home.• Basic parent orientation materials are available in the dominant languages of the school’s ELL population. Curriculum letters are sent home monthly translated in Chinese, Bengali and Spanish.• All parents of ELLs are notified annually or as the need arises in the language of their preference about program choices available.The school has translators to help parents communicate in their native language with school personnel.• The Parent Coordinator, Administration and Literacy Coach are active liaisons between the school and parents.• Materials and notification letters are available in the preferred languages.• The school provides translation/interpretation services to help parents communicate in their native language with school personnel. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sara Tucci, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Louis F. Simeone School DBN: 24Q007 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sara Tucci Title Principal Naomi Landau Assistant Principal Marjorie Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Orit Sperber Kathy Bueno Erika Liriano Leigh Pena Kathy Hartney N/A ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ruth Gonzalez School Counselor Madelene Chan Yasmin Torres N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yasmin Torres Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q007 School Name: Louis F. Simeone Superintendent: Madeline Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Katherine Hartney Coach yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. WIthin 10 days of a students' enrollment, we determine the primary language spoken by the parent/guardian of each student enrolled in the school and if such language is not English, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate affectively with the school. We determine the language preferences for the parent community based on the ATS report of preferred languages, blue card data, and parent surveys. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 76  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish Bengali Chinese 472 264 116 220 41 23 10 19.4 466 266 118 206 41 23 10 18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Chinese,Spanish and Bengali Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Curriculum Letters monthly Sent to Translation unit in advance Meetings and Workshops (On going basis) Cell phone policy Afterschool and Saturday Academy (as needed) Title I Meeting (September) on going Sent to Translation unit in advance September as needed Translation provided in house for meetings Sent to Translation unit in advance Sent to Translation unit in advance 2018-19 CEP 77  Testing Memos and Results (August, September, March, April) September Sent to Translation unit in advance Entitlement Letters (September) Placement letters (September) Orientiation letters (September) August, September, March, April) Sent to translation unit in advance Back to School Welcome Letter (September) September Vacation Homework Packets (December, February, April) Student of the Month (monthly) Kindergarten Registration (April) Principal/Parent Meetings (monthly) Meet the Teacher Night (September) Enrichment Activities such as Family Math and Literacy Night, School Carnival (as needed) September September September September (December, February, April) Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March, May) monthly Sent to translation unit in advance sent to translation in advance sent to translation in advance sent to translation in advance Sent to translation unit Sent to translation unit in advance 2018-19 CEP 78  RAZ Kids Informational Letters (as needed) April monthly September as needed November, March, May) As needed Sent to translation unit in advance Sent to Translation unit in advance, Interpretation provided in house Sent to Translation unit in advance, Interpretation provided in house Sent to Translation unit in advance, Interpretation provided in house Sent to Translation unit in advance, Interpretation provided in house Sent to Translation unit in advance 2018-19 CEP 79  Safety Meeting monthly as needed sent to translation sent to translation Class transfers (as needed) as needed sent to translation Special Education and Related Services (as needed) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March, May) Curriculum Night (September) Monthly Principal/Parent Workshops Tuesday Parental Engagement (weekly on an individual and/or small group basis) November, March, May September as needed Guidance Counselor calls and meetings (as needed) Teacher - Parent phone conversations and in person meetings (as needed) weekly Administration-Parent phone conversations (as needed) interpretation service(s)? Interpretation provided in house/letters sent to Translation unit in advance/over the phone interpretation Interpretation provided in house/letters sent to Translation unit in advance Interpretation provided in house/letters sent to Translation unit in advance/ Interpretation provided in house/letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit 2018-19 CEP 80  Meetings with School Nurse (as needed) Special Education meetings with parents (as needed) as needed as needed as needed as needed as needed Interpretation provided in house Interpretation provided in house/letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit/translators in house letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit/translators in house letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit/translators in house 2018-19 CEP 81  letters translated in house/translation provided by interpretation unit/translators in house meetings regarding safety as needed letters translated in house/translation provided by interpetation unit /translators in house disciplinary meetings Parent Association meetings as needed monthly letters translated in house letters translated in house 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use Blackboard Connect to notify parents of emergencies. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff is provided with instructions in over the phone interpretation use, in house translators are provided for meetings, letters are translated through the translation unit Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 82  In order to fulfill the parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 we: 1. Provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. 2. Post a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the most prominent covered languages and indicating the availability of interpretation services at the gate entrance to the school as well as next to the Security desk. 3. Create a safety plan that contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. 4. Provide the parents/guardians with the NYCDOE website in order to for parents to obtain information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of the parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. 5. Provide translated documents for all languages in which parents of more than 10% of the children speak using the Translations Department. 6. All notifcation documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: https://intranet.nycboe.net/SchooSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? After each workshop, parents are asked to complete a survey, which has been translated into various languages, indicating their satisfaction of the workshop provided. Additionally, when analyzing the results from the NYC 2016-17 School Quality Guide 98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school 2018-19 CEP 83 
