2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q013 School Name: P.S. 013 CLEMENT C. MOORE Principal: EVELYN VELEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Clement C. Moore Kindergarten – Grade 5 94-19 56 AvenueElmhurst, NY 11373 School Number (DBN): 24Q013 718-271-1021 Phone Number: 718-699-3008 Fax: Mrs. Evelyn Velez Evelez10@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mrs. Evelyn Velez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mrs. RosalynMorrissey Mrs.KatherynArango Mr. Robert Aiello SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: PhivelineSolano n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 58 th Avenue, Room 102 Corona, NY 11368 Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225 -2020 Phone Number: n/a Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mrs. Evelyn Velez Mrs. Rosalyn Morrissey Mrs. KaterinArango Ms. Irma Bencosme Ms. PhivelineSolano Ms. PanagiotaTzorzis Mrs. Lauren Cardillo Mrs. KristieLeone Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Ms. Michelle Mendez Ms. MyriamPaucar Ms. JanethMontero Ms. PhivelineSolano Ms. Maria Jimenez Mr. Robert Aiello Katherine Martinez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The students’ mission has been revised to reflect the principles of the LEADER IN ME program. Section 4: CEP Overview At PS 13 we are a community of leaders. We recognize, honor, and celebrate the leaders within us. We work together with one end in mind; to be the best me that I can be. 2018-19 CEP 9  Instructional Focus: PS 13 Q will strengthen student writing skills through rigorous differentiated strategies and the creation of personalized learning plans with embedded daily informal assessments that will support student growth. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 13 is located in Elmhurst, Queens and serves approximately 1520 students in K-5 in a stimulating environment that tries to nurture the highest academic standards in all of its students. In 2018-2019 our school has 10 Kindergarten classes which includes 4 dual language classes, 1 ENL class, 2 ICT classes and 1 self-contained Special Education class. There are 10 First Grade classes, including 1 ENL class, 2 dual language classes, 1 ICT class, 1 ICT Bilingual Class, 1 self-contained Special Education class and I self-contained Special Education Bilingual Bridge class. There are 9 Second Grade classes, which include 2 ENL classes, 1 ICT class consisting of ENL students and 2 Dual Language classes and 1 self-contained Special Education class consisting of ENL students and 1 SETSS class . Third Grade has 10 classes, including 2 ENL classes, 2 ICT classes consisting of ENL students , 2 self-contained Special Education classes, 1 Native Language Arts class and 1 SETSS class. There are 10 Fourth Grade classes, including 2 ENL classes, 1 ICT class, 2 ICT classes consisting of ENL students and 1 self-contained Special Education class. The Fifth grade has 10 classes including 2 ENL classes, 1 ICT class, 1 ICT class consisting of ENL students and 2 self-contained Special Education classes. Grades 3- 5 will continue to be departmentalized in the 2018-2019 school year. All classes average about 30-32 students, except Kindergarten which registers are holding at 25. Our Instruction Focus is PS 13 Q will strengthen student writing skills through rigorous differentiated strategies and the creation of personalized learning plans with embedded daily informal assessments that will support student growth. PS 13 Q will continue to enhance rigorous differentiated strategies through the creation of personalized learning plans and embed daily informal assessments that will support student growth. Students will develop the skill of using evidence to support arguments in discussion, which will then transfer to stronger writing in literacy and math, and develop the communication and collaboration skills that support college and career readiness. We created a school-wide writing assessment that aligns to this instructional focus that includes text across multiple genres, an open-ended writing prompt, and a teacher-made rubric based on the CCLS. The students take benchmark assessments three times a year and the data is analyzed by the Literacy Coach and the Data Team. Our students from grade 3-5 will continue with their 1:1 technology initiative. In addition, grades 2 students and Dual Language students in K and 1 also received 1:1 ipads. We will continue to implement several initiatives that were well received and a huge success and we are enhancing these changes for 2018-2019. As a result of the LEADER IN ME program, we utilized the book, The Seven Habits of Happy Kids Series by Sean Covey. In addition the students learned about each habit and implemented it into their daily lives . The classes participated in a variety of learning activities based on the book which unified our school community. Another initiative that was successful was the use of Thinking Maps in the classrooms. Teachers will receive refresher training through professional development. The students are encouraged to use the cognitive vocabulary that goes along with each map. The maps are used throughout the grades and in every classroom. The Physical Education Department has been integral in implementing an initiative that has increased physical activities amongst our children. Each day we begin with JAMmin’ Minutes which fosters an environment where physical activity is valued. Another healthy initiative has been the SMALL BITES/COMMON THREADS program that focuses on healthy eating 2018-19 CEP 10  habits and nutrition. In addition, we have added a wellness room, that can be utilized by both teachers and students. It offers healthy snack on Tuesdays to promote healthy eating and wellness. The school health teacher has worked with the students to create a SPACE garden which has been extremely successful. Teachers are collaborating together to roll out these initiatives and increase student engagement. Parents are showing an increased amount of interest in their children’s education by joining the Parent Action team and attending more school events/programs. Several school wide events were held during the past year and will be continued again in 2018-2019, some of which include: Positive Tuesdays, Leadership Day, Multicultural Night, Family Games Night, 5th Grade Dance, 5th grade Spelling Bee, Father’s Day and Mother’s Day Celebrations, Field Day, 5th grade senior trip, Book fair, Literacy and math week, Mary Poppins Performance, Star War Reads, Wacky Tacky Day, Character Day, Poem in a pocket, stomp out bullying, Clement C. Moore Day, Project Ballet, Buddy Reading, DELTA Arts and holiday sale. We anticipate seeing the positive trends reflected in several of the goals set forth in this CEP. In particular, students and parents will hopefully surpass the anticipated goal set when they take their respective surveys later this year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school consists of Title I and Title III students who all receive free lunch. Additionally our student population includes 29.5% ELL Students and 14.52% SWD Students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Collaborative teachers is an area of strength for our school. 100% teachers participate in teacher teams, common planning and action teams. Another strength is a supportive environment 90% of our staff have been participating in professional development opportunities that include technology. Additionally, we are entering phase4 of the Leader in Me program which promotes leadership skills, student autonomy and a positive school culture. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q013 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1597 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 82 81 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 70.1% % Reduced Lunch 31.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 54.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 40.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 133 129 94.9% 1.2% 13.7% 9.0% 31.1% 1.2% 8 19% 7.9 48.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES YES YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of Data analyzed by the CORE Team, we decided that an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be writing and comprehension in all subject areas. This includes writing skills, critical thinking skills, sentence structure, vocabulary, inferencing and deconstructing and explaining how to solve math word problems. The needs of the ENL students, SWD, and advanced learners must be challenged, given an opportunity to succeed and have skills to engage productively in society. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, ENL and AIS providers and will implement the Writing Revolution in grade 3 to 5 and Learning in the primary pond for grades K to 2, to improve student writing skills in all subject areas measured by checklists, teacher observations, writing samples and assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development will be provided for specific topics and teachers in need in regards to teaching comprehension and writing strategies. Intervisitations will be scheduled based on teacher need, as well as by teacher request. All pedagogical staff September 2018 to June 2019 Common Planning periods will be used to provide an opportunity to share best practices and procedures. Positive Tuesdays and parent workshops will be used to engage families in supporting their understanding of writing strategies and how to help their children at home. All pedagogical staff September 2018 to June 2019 Parents, Families and pedagogical staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Participating teachers, Staff Developers/Coaches Administration, Participating teachers, Staff, Developers/Coaches Administration, Participating teachers, Staff Developers/Coaches, Parent Coordinator & PA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have created a parent action team that meets monthly, weekly positive Tuesdays that meet with teachers and parent workshops to inform families about the curriculum and common core. Academic celebrations throughout the year inviting parents into classrooms to celebrate curriculum through authentic student work products in literacy. Our key personnel is the parent coordinator, coaches, teachers and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will attend Professional Development opportunities within and outside of our school whereas they can then turnkey information during PD times and throughout the year. Common planning periods will be used so that coaches can continue to offer teacher support and share best practices amongst different classes and grades. Materials such as: Leveled texts, Supplemental texts to support Ready Gen Resources, iReady, Writing strategies book by Jennifer Serravallo and The writing Revolution book by Judith C. Hochman and Natalie Wexler. 2018-19 CEP 14  Technology Software programs: Imagine Learning, MyOn, Newsomatic, School4one and use of Apple products like keynote, pages, clips and iMovie. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50 % of teachers will implement the writing revolution into teaching students writing skills. These strategies will be monitored by administrative observations. In addition, common planning will be attended by coaches and administration to share and reflect on student work, achievement and progression. Time is built into teacher's schedules to share best practices in order to improve their students writing skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) This will be measured by the data and student work samples collected from the ELA and Math Coaches and observations conducted by administrators. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As the result of our continued work with the Leader in Me program and NYC school survey, teachers and parents feel the students are safe and teachers respond to their needs. Students respond well to adult guidance and school wide initiatives supporting social-emotional growth. Teacher action teams are created to support and foster activities that promote a positive school culture, environment and social-emotional growth. Entering Phase 4 of our Leader in Me program continue success must follow to achieve Lighthouse Status. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will participate in school-wide multicultural, diversity and social emotional activities within our Leader in Me program that foster tolerance, respect, empathy and student autonomy resulting in improved student relationships and behavior as measured by classroom observation, student leadership roles, tracked goals within leadership binders presented during our student led conferences as well as positive student responses on end of year surveys. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Book of the month has been selected to highlight diversity and social emotional learning. All Students K to 5 September to June Social Emotional Action Team created to to support and foster activities that promote a positive school culture, environment and social-emotional growth. Administration, Participating teachers, Coaches, Parent Coordinator and Action Team members along with Lighthouse Team Boys Club has been established to give students a safe place to discuss personal and academic struggles focusing on SWD. 5th grade September to June Teachers and Students boys 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We have created a parent action teams that meet monthly, Leader in me positive Tuesdays that meet with teachers and parent workshops to inform families about the the leader in me program. Additionally we hold multicultural night where students and their family are involved in learning about different cultures. Our key personnel is the the light house team liaison, the lighthouse team members, parent coordinator, coaches, teachers and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will attend monthly action teams and continue to receive leader in me support. Materials such as: Leveled texts, books of the month, seven habits of happy kids by Sean Covey and Social Studies passport curriculum. Technology Software programs: MyOn, Newsomatic, School4one and use of Apple products like keynote, pages, clips and iMovie. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of students will participate in school-wide multicultural, diversity and social emotional activities within our Leader in Me program that foster tolerance, respect, empathy and student autonomy resulting in improved student relationships and behavior as measured by classroom observation, student leadership roles, tracked goals within leadership binders presented during our student led conferences as well as positive student responses on end of year surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leadership Binder, classroom observation, behavior and goal tracking along with our leader in me walkthrough. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of the NY State 2018 State Test scores analyzed by the CORE Team, only 40.6% of students in grades 3 to 5 were proficient in ELA and 48.9% of grade 3 to 5 students were proficient in Math. We decided that an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be strengthening our literacy and math skills in all subject areas through professional learning cycles for all teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in targeted grade specific professional learning cycles emphasizing literacy and math aligned to student needs resulting in improved pedagogy and improvement for all students as measured by growth in student F&P levels, math benchmark levels and attainment of math and literacy goals. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Selective Teachers work with the Hall of Science to implement computational Thinking into instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September to June Selective Teachers in grades 2 and 5 Grade 5 Math Teachers, Selective grade 2 Teachers, coaches, Trainers from NYSCI, administration Teachers meet during common planning periods to plan rigorous, standards based ELA and Math lessons that address the differentiated needs of students within the grade. Teachers September to June Administration, teachers, Coaches Grade level teacher teams analyze student data to identify next steps for instruction. Teachers September to June Administration, teachers, Coaches Teachers meet monthly for a Bagel and Books session to discuss a focused book and how it can be implemented in teacher practices. Teachers September to June Administration, teachers, Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Creating positive Tuesday during parent engagement time, whereas teachers can model and share collaborative practices. Teachers can share noticings from looking at student work with parents and identifying ways parents can help students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will attend weekly common planning time and teacher teams. Materials such as: Leveled texts, student work, Go Math, STEM Resources, writing pieces, Ready Gen Resources, benchmark assessments and F & P levels. Technology Software programs: Imagine Learning, Imagine Math, School4one use of Apple products like keynote, pages, clips, iMovie, swift playground, scratch JR, Sphero programming along with other coding programs. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of teachers will participate in targeted grade specific professional learning cycles emphasizing literacy and math aligned to student needs resulting in improved pedagogy and improvement for all students as measured by growth in student F&P levels, math benchmark levels and attainment of math and literacy goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Common planning attendance sheets, math benchmarks, F & P, writing baseline, pre and post test in all subject areas and classroom observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of last years successful 1:1 technology initiative in grades 3 to 5 we have provided ipads to all teachers and students in grades 2 and dual language classes K and 1. School4one provides standard based data that allows teachers to assess students and provide instruction to meet their individual needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Teachers consisting of clusters, ENL, AIS, Coaches and classroom teachers will receive professional Development in use of technology to support instruction as measured through student data, classroom observation and students' authentic tasks. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will attend Apple Store workshop training Tuesdays and Thursdays throughout the school year Teachers September to June Teachers will attend school4one training sessions Teachers Students will attend Apple Store for iPad workshops Students NYSCI partnership to provide technology skills and assistance to teachers and students in the use of computational thinking. Selective teachers and students in grades 2 and 5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September to June September to June September to June Administration, teachers, Staff Developers/Coaches, Spoc Administration, teachers, Staff Developers/Coaches, Spoc Administration, teachers, Staff Developers/Coaches, Spoc Administration, teachers, NYSCI Staff Developers/Coaches, Spoc, Robin Hood Foundation How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer Apple store parent workshops to use iPads, Positive Tuesdays to demonstrate technology usage at home. Technology incorporated programs have unlimited use at home. Personnel will include SPOC, classroom teacher and Apple Store facilitators. Parent Association will continue to receive iPads and may provide additional training to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and students will attend Apple Store workshops for training. School4one professional development will be provided. The NYSCI trainers will work with teachers on curriculum and use of computational thinking in their plans. They will also facilitate lessons and workshops. 2018-19 CEP 23  Materials such as: iPads, unplugged activities, smartboards, promethean boards, promethean Tables. Technology Software programs: Imagine Learning, MyOn, Newsomatic, Math facts, Imagine Math, School4one use of Apple products like keynote, pages, clips, iMovie, swift playground, and/or other apps such as scratch JR, Sphero programming along with other coding programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of Teachers consisting of clusters, ENL, AIS, Coaches and classroom teachers will receive professional Development in use of technology to support instruction as measured through student data, classroom observation and students' authentic tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School4one data, Apple classroom observation, Imagine math and learning data, Myon data, Technology tasks and projects. Focused groups will also be measure through a system of benchmarks by the Robin Hood Foundation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the districts and school needs we need to ensure that we are maintaining as many kids in the general education environment as possible. As a result, we are attempting to reduce the amount of referrals within our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in number of parent volunteers and parent action team members in order to improve family engagement and parent involvement through a variety of workshops that support academic and social development. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent action teams will meet monthly and collaborate with other actions teams to coordinate school wide events. Parents September to June Providers of ENL and SWD teachers will provide parent workshops to support student learning. Parents September to June Parents with take part in cooking classes, monthly trips without students and parent professional development Parents September to June SLT, Teachers, coaches, parent coordinator, administration, lighthouse team, PA ENL Teachers and Special Education Teachers parent coordinator, administration, PA, SLT, parent action team members Parents will attend parent workshop and positive Tuesday to support instructional learning at home. Parents September through June Teachers, coaches, parent coordinator, administration, PA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Teachers will encourage parents to create WIG's with their children at home. Teachers will provide parents with templates and online resources to continue leader in me initiative, volunteer postings will be available for parents in the office. A family game night is held with the focus on math and literacy. Also, teachers can provide more information during positive Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parents will attend workshops and positive Tuesdays to help support their child's' learning. Parent action team members will attend monthly meetings. Parent Association coordinate picture day, candy sale and other fundraiser opportunities and hold leader of the month ceremonies. Materials such as: Leader in me habits books, letters of communication and volunteer sign up page. 2018-19 CEP 26  Technology Software programs: Remind, Classdojo and iPads. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in number of parent volunteers and parent action team members in order to improve family engagement and parent involvement through a variety of workshops that support academic and social development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent action team attendance sheets, Parent Association Meeting attendance sheets, Volunteer sign up sheets, Sign in sheets at school wide family events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Literacy AE Details TBD Small group instruction One-to-one instruction During the school day Math AE Details TBD Small group instruction One-to-one instruction During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Holdovers, Teacher Recommendation, Previous NYS ELA and Math Level 1, Prior year PID, Current year PID, Screening test (TBD) Performance, Parent Request, Reading Levels , and struggling students highlighted during SIT meetings. Teacher Recommendation, NYS Math Level 1 and NYS Math Low Level 2, Teacher Recommendation scores , and struggling students highlighted during SIT meetings. Science Social Studies N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Individual Educational Plan (IEP) Additional programs are provided by the following: Teacher Recommendation Parent Recommendation Speech Teacher Social Worker School Psychologists Struggling students highlighted during SIT meetings. Occupational Therapists During the school day Small group instruction One-to-one instruction Physical Therapist Hearing Specialist Vision Specialist Guidance Counselor IEP Teacher SETSS Teachers Teams: The following teams meet weekly to discuss programs and student data: Academic Intervention Team (AIT) Response to Intervention (RTI) School Intervention Team (SIT) Data Team 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Supplies, clothing, field trip money assistance, school uniforms, etc. Approximately 152 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff members are highly qualified and teaching in their licensed area. Many of the staff members have their Masters and some have additional credits in the area of reading and/or math. Our staff members are constantly engaged in learning new methods of instruction to improve our implementation of the common core curriculum and for teaching English Language Learners and students with special needs. Applicants are interviewed by the administration and the most qualified person is selected. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by the network’s HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. In addition, professional development is given weekly to all staff members. In order to address the needs of our students, teachers work closely with a math and literacy coaches to improve instruction. To Implement our 1:1 technology initiative teachers receive support from the spoc and our school has a partnership with the apple store. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As per the UFT contract, Professional Development is provided weekly on Mondays and is a direct result of the needs assessment survey the PD Team administered to the staff. Staff members have requested specific training, such as Fundations so training was provided for all K-2 teachers. Additionally, some staff members have requested training in RTI/AIS and have attended DOE PD sessions outside of the school. In addition, P.S. 13 is working on improving students writing through the use of the writing revolution initiative, training is provided on Mondays and staff development days. On Tuesday afternoons Teacher Teams meet together to turnkey information and share best practices/inquiry work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents receive a letter explaining the morning routines for kindergarten students and any pertinent information they will need as they begin elementary school. The first week of school parents are invited to bring their Kindergarten students into the school and stay with them to ease the transition time. The teachers have a Kindergarten Orientation with the parents and families to share expectations, classroom routines and share information about the curriculum. The Parent Coordinator does a tour of the school for parents and children entering Kindergarten in the Spring. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers at P.S. 13 are an integral part of the decision-making process regarding curriculum and instruction, and therefore assessments. The Data Team looks at the Literacy and Math data that is collected from teachers throughout the year and discusses noticings and next steps. The MoSL Team, in conjunction with the CORE Team, had conversations regarding the options for the MoSL assessments that were to be selected for the 2018-2019 school year. The MoSL Team took their suggestions/concerns into account and the selection this year will remain the ones selected for the 2017-2018 school year in hopes of better meeting the needs of our students. The Cabinet meets twice a week and has conversations about what is working well and what is not working and needs to be address when it comes to the assessments/data. Much of the data is shared through PD sessions or the Teacher Teams each week. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 CEP 33  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 767,7165.00 102,590.00 66,254.00 0 9,118,001.00 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 2,4,5,6,7 2,4,5,6,7 2,4,5,6,7 2,4,5,6,7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 34   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Clement C. Moore School (PS 13Q) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Clement C. Moore School (PS 13Q) will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Clement C. Moore School (PS 13Q) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 38  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting student-led conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Student-Led Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Create and Track personal and academic wildly important goals; ● follow the Seven Habits of happy Kids and demonstrate leadership skills; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Clement C. Moore This school is (check one): DBN: 24Q013 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III ELL After School Program meets 2 and 3 days a week from either 2:30 to 4:10pm or 2:30 to 5:10pm. The program runs from November 1, 2018 through March 24, 2019 potentially later pending budget. We intend to expand the program to include second graders as well. Many of our immigrant students are also English as a New Language (ENL) students. ENLs in grades 2, 3, 4, and 5 who have the lowest reading levels will work in small groups on reading comprehension and writing activities. There are three Title III after school teachers. One ENL certified teacher works each day and pushes into the classroom. Each class has no more than twenty-five students. The ENL certified teachers use a Co-teaching practice with the classroom teachers to scaffold and reinforce academic language development. The ELL Title III After School Program will continue to provide intensive after school instruction in English Language Development focusing on reading and writing skills using scaffolds to support immigrant students which overlap with the ENL students. Some of the scaffolds use thinking maps and story maps. Comprehension skills are built up through monitoring comprehension, asking questions, inferring meaning, determining importance, summarizing, and synthesizing. This program prepares students for the state ELA exam. The ELL Title III After School Program teachers use the FinishLine workbooks for ENL students which include various intervention strategies for language acquistion. We intend to purchase additional resources and books to support the students. In addition, we extended the Title III Saturday Program which started on November 3, 2018 and will run through March 23, 2019 potentially longer pending budget. The two classes will have an ENL certified teacher providing ENL support for each grade. The ENL certified teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher. Small group instruction is provided as well. Finish Line for Math and Finish Line for Reading are the materials that are used for the ELL Title III Saturday Program. The passages in Finish Line for Reading are predominantly nonfiction on Science and Social Studies topics. Teachers will provide direct instruction in answering extended responses and constructed responses in both reading and math. Like the ELL Title III After School Program, the ELL Title III Saturday Program's goal is to help prepare ENL students and newly proficient ENLs for the New York State Math and ELA tests. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: During professional development time and Tuesday afternoon during Teacher Teams Inquiry meetings, ENL teachers will attend professional development outside of the building and turnkey information to the staff. The topics of the professional development will focus on discussion techniques, scaffolding for student autonomy, and strengthening reading skills through guided reading practices and writing. Some of the strategies that teachers will share are continuing to embed language objectives into lessons, scaffolding lessons to ensure student understanding, creating an effective classroom environment for ENLs, and strengthening ENLs reading skills through guided reading. The Assistant Principal, Mrs. Kondel, will share scaffolding strategies to support immigrant students by providing multiple ways for them to structure their writing so that each student can write and express themselves effectively in a balanced literacy environment. The focus for the professional developments will be on planning for purposeful talk to engage students in academic discourse and managing academic discourse through grouping and collaborative activities to increase student agency. Some of the resources shared with teachers are from WeTeachNYC.org and Teach Channel. Another topic of professional development for teachers that will continue will be on the use of Thinking Maps. Teachers have been trained and are continually trained in the routines for using Thinking Maps, such as hand signals, use of color, scaffolds, frame of reference, and guiding questions. Imagine Learning in Spanish, a reading program for our Dual Language program, will be used to supplement our immigrant population. Imagine Learning includes many scaffolds in place to support learners as well as featuring voice recording, songs for every letter, sight work work, fun games and is completely differentiated. In addition, teachers will have access to data and can print out reports. Teachers receive ongoing training sessions on Imagine Learning throughout the school year. Teachers will continue to receive professional development on Building Vocabulary and using strategies from Nancy Bells', Visualization and Verbalization approach to adding details to writing. Tools and strategies will be integrated into all content areas. The teachers will turnkey new strategies they learn at the professional development. They may include strategies such as: Word Warmth, Word Work and Word Play from the text-A Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction in K-12 Classrooms. The text can also be found as a PDF file on the NYC DOE website. Teachers will also share out best practices that they use in their classroom that is supported by research. The goal of these professional development sessions is to improve teaching and learning in the subjects and enhance the programs we already have. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Immigrant parent and community involvement continues to be a major component of our school plan. P.S. 13Q continues to upgrade the school's web site which will facilitate greater communication between parents. The website lists upcoming events, a link with the Common Core Standards, educational games, and a read aloud featuring the Principal and other staff members. The Parent Coordinator will work with the ENL Coordinator as well as the Guidance Counselors, Literacy Coach, and the Math Coach to provide monthly workshops on topics related to parents and education. The monthly workshops will include Title III immigrant parents and share information on standardized tests, a family night of Math and Literacy games, health related topics, immigration, report cards, discipline code, parent-teacher conferences, and summer activities for parents and children. Additionally, Title III immigrant parents are regularly invited to school to share in their students' successes such as our monthly writer's celebrations that take place in the classroom and Leader of the Month celebrations. We also will continue to provide parent paint nights for our parents as well as immigrant parents. Parents will also learn about what their children are learning in the classroom as well as the Middle School Application process. We also provide workshops on non-academic topics such as lice, nutrition, and bullying/cyberbullying. All workshops are translated into spanish by the Parent Coordinator and into chinese by one of our paraprofessionals. Parents are kept informed of school issues and activities with letters translated in all community languages. The Department of Education Translation Unit assists in translating memos to parents in many different languages as well as providing translations over the phone. School Messenger (with translation in spanish and chinese) is also used to remind parents of important meetings and upcoming events. P.S. 13Q evaluates the needs of the parents by sending out school wide parent surveys, reviewing Chancellor Citywide Survey results, and by getting feedback directly from parents during Parent Association Meetings and Parent Orientation meetings. Parent workshops and Parent Orientations end with an opportunity to fill out a Parent Feedback form. The Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator review these to get ideas for future workshops and presentations. P.S. 13Q addresses the needs of its parents, including immigrant parents, by closely attending to parent requests and comments stated in the Learning Environment Survey. Workshops requests are collected and are used for future workshop topics. Based on the results of these school and citywide surveys along with feedback from parents directly, P.S. 13Q conducts various workshops to address the needs of the parents. We also intend to provide english classes for parents. These classes will give parents the opportunity to learn the language in order to help their children at home. Parents will also gain language skills to communicate with school personnel and other aspects of their everyday lives. We will continue to plan Parent Trips. These trips serve as a means to gain knowledge of information about our community and the many places that they can go with their children for 2018-19 CEP 46 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities support, learning and fun. The first planned trips will be in November for the Queens Museum and Lefrak City Library. Although we have upgraded and enhanced our parent library with parenting books and books they can read to their children, this year, we plan to focus on books that will support their child in building autonomous learning skills. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Clement C. Moore Borough Queens School Number 013 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Evelyn Velez Coach Mrs. Calapai ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. D. Loria Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Rendino Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Cardillo Related-Service Provider Mrs. Girin Superintendent Mrs. M. Chan Assistant Principal Cheralene Kondel Coach Mrs. Matos School Counselor Mr. Torres Parent Mrs. Arango Parent Coordinator Mrs. B. Ramirez Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Lin Other (Name and Title) Mrs. Mouzakitis C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 15 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1527 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 450 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.47%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): SP If yes, indicate language(s): SP/CH Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 1 2 2 5 Lang. SP SP CH Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 4 4 0 0 0 3 0 2 2 2 1 2 3 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 8 2 0 14 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Data from various assessments is compared throughout the year in order to immediately revise plans when necessary so that the school’s goals are continuously being met. Data is routinely gathered, analyzed and discussed to track all ELL students’ academic progress and needs. To assess the early literacy skills of our ELL’s we use: * Writing Baseline: Narrative, Informative, and Opinion* Fountas and Pinnell Running Records/English and Spanish• New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT)* Letter and Sound Recognition (Fountas and Pinnell)• Ready GEN Performance Teacher Created Performance Task• Daily 5 Quick Writes* Classroom and Cluster Teacher Created Tests *TEAM Program Assessments and Checklists 2018-19 CEP 49 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet during Common Planning and Teacher Teams to discuss current data. ENL Liasion is present during CORE and DATA Team meetings to discuss findings. ENL Liasion is used as a Coach to provide PDs ENL Push-In and Pull-out teachers sit in on Grade Teacher Teams to support classroom teachers in enhancing plans/scaffolding for ENL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL , Bi-lingual, and Dual Language program by studying assessment data. We look at informal assessments and formal assessments such as the NYSESLAT, New York State ELA exams, New York State Math Exams, NY State Science tests, Performance Tasks, Fountas and Pinnell Reading levels and TEAM assessment results. In addition, we check to see if we met AYP for the ELLs and our AMAOs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After the summative data have been gathered, the ENL Liasion supports the teacher and students in specific areas through intervisitations, one-to-one meetings, and Professional Development opportunities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S.13 uses the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework in all of its classrooms to guide instruction. All ENL and bilingual students receive high-quality, evidence-based core instruction, in Tier I. ENL, bilingual, and classroom teachers are always assessing their student’s text comprehension and their oral and written fluency. Our teachers’ regular classroom practice is flexible, based on short-cycle (over seconds or minutes within a single lesson) formative assessments, and longer cycle, medium to long-term assessments, summative assessments, such as unit tests, and state tests. ENL strategies are intertwined into Tiers I, II, and III lesson plans for ENLs. Students who do not progress at the rate expected based on the progress of “true peers”, receive Tier II targeted interventions in addition to high-quality core instruction. When at least 80% of the class shows evidence of comprehension, the remaining students that did not, are targeted to receive Tier II interventions in small groups. Students who respond to Tier II interventions are removed from the targeted interventions. Students who do not respond to Tier II interventions receive Tier III intensive interventions. Teachers continue to analyze data through a language acquisition lens, while designing and implementing targeted supplemental supports. Students in Tier III receive one-on-one interventions with the classroom teacher or with the ENL teacher using additional ENL strategies. Students who respond to Tier III interventions may go back to Tier II or Tier I. After sufficient time for intervention to be effective, students who do not respond to Tier III interventions, despite targeted, high-quality classroom-level instruction and additional supplemental supports, may be referred to the Committee on Special Education. Within the RTI model, there is a systematic approach to determining when struggling ENLs need special education services and P.S.13 adheres strictly to that model. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that third grade students had the most commanding levels, followed by fifth, first ,then fourth, and last second. On the NYSITELL, we had the most students test out, 22 at entering, 7 at emerging, 18 at transitioning, and 22 at expanding levels. The data reveals that levels entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding are very close for our newcomers. All levels are essentially even. Teachers will differentiate for each level in order to help our students reach English proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Both the ENL Liasion and Assistant Principal of ENL disseminate the data and through discussion and planning make adjustments to the programs as necessary. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Free Standing ENL Program provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English Language acquisition. Students in free standing ENL prgrams can come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL:1. Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that the students can succeed in core content. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENl in lieu of core-content area instruction.2. Integrated ENL is instruction is to build English language instruction through content area. It is delivered by a dually certified ENL and content area teacher or a co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a content area teacher. Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after existing ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. 3. TBE classes are designed so that the students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is common core aligned to accelerate student achievement. As students develop English language skills, time decreases in the home language. content areas are taught in both languages. PS13 has one TBE in first grade.4. PS13 has two Dual language classes in kindergarten. They are designed to continue developing students' home languages, as well as English language skills, throughout schooling. In addition, English proficient students are given the opportunity to learn a new language. Both groups provide good linguistc role models for each other, and through their interactions, support language development in both languages. Students in this program should remain in the program during their tenure in the school system. Dl students receive half their instruction in the target or new language. Language is taught in content areas as well as through literacy. b. TBE program. If applicable. TBE classes are designed so that the students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is common core aligned to accelerate student achievement. As students develop English language skills, time decreases in the home language. Content areas are taught in both languages. PS13 has two TBE classes on first grade . c. DL program. If applicable. PS13 has four Dual language classes in kindergarten, two on first grade,two on second grade, and 2 on third grade. They are designed to continue developing students' home languages, as well as English language skills, throughout schooling. In addition, English proficient students are given the opportunity to learn a new language. Both groups provide good linguistic role models for each other, and through their interactions, support language development in both languages. Students in this program should remain in the program during their tenure in the school system. DL students receive half their instruction in the target or ne language. Language is taught in content areas as well as through literacy. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL for the Entering and Emerging students. These students receive 180 minutes of standalone services by a certified ENL teacher and 180 minutes of integrated ENL services by two individually certified teachers(co-teaching). The transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes . The transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of flexible ENL instruction. The expanding students receive 180 minutes of 2018-19 CEP 51  integrated ENL. The commanding students will receive 90 minutes of ENL services. These services are built into their daily schedules. HLA is taught in our Dual Language Program 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content areas are taught in English using current approaches and methods. We use a hands on, visual and auditory method in order to include all 4 modalities of learning(listening,speaking, reading and writing). Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response, Q-TEL, Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Core Instruction and CALLA are also methodologies that are used to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards. The ESL program uses English to teach the students. ReadyGen, Time for Kids, Imagine Learning , On Our Way to English, and Rewards Vocabulary Instruction Program as well as Go Math are used to teach the ELL students content area knowledge, concepts, literacy and thinking skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who come to school for the first time are given the Spanish LAB after they are tested on the NYSITELL and are entering, emerging, transitioning, or expanding Native language tests for students are made available when needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. SIFE students would be given individual instruction using phonics instruction, grammar, developing listening skills along with reading and writing. Number sense and basic math skills would also be part of the daily curriculum. 6b. Students receiving services for less than 3 years would receive instruction in oral language skills, writing, reading and developing listening skills. ELLs taking ELA tests would require instruction focused mainly on reading, reading comprehension, answering questions and writing.6c. Our plan for ELLs receiving service for 4 to 6 years would focus on vocabulary building, reading comprehension, writing skills and listening skills and developing speaking skills. We also provide these children with a great deal of reading materials of different genres. ESL strategies will be used such as CALLA and Q-TEL.6d. Our plan for long term ELLs includes receiving intervention services both in and out of the classroom. After school enrichment programs along with classroom instructional plan of action that is tailored to the students' needs. The student will be provided with a variety of reading materials from different genres. We will provide strategies to develop comprehension and language acquisition.6e. Former ELLs(in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient will receive additional ESL intervention in the classroom. These students will be given additional literacy and content area support for 2 years. They will attend the after school program for enrichment. and AIS support. The students will, also, have an instructional plan of action to help them. They will also receive testing accommodations for 2 years. These accommodations are time and a half on all New York State tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are provided with plenty of visuals and dramatized reading material. Total Physical Response methodologies building academic vocabulary, simplifying content and concept knowledge are ways to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. The technology that is used to help these students includes Smart Boards, CD players and computers. The ENL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the Assistant Principal and/or the Principal to make sure ELL-SWDs get the correct ELL services. In some cases, a Bilingual Assistant helps the student in class throughout the day. The ELL- SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as the mainstream students. However, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the student's abilities and on the 2018-19 CEP 52  IEP. Some students may need simplified instruction using only one or two words while others may need simpler language or have the task broken down into smaller components. Furthermore, multiple intelligence problem solving strategies are also used by teachers to promote academic success. These strategies include linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal and naturalistic. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and schedule flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment through after-school programs, small group instruction, trips, special events like Field Day, lunch time and recess. P.S. 13 ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers through meetings between the general education teachers, special education teachers, the out of classroom teachers, SETTs teacher and School Based Support Team as well as the administration. At lunch time, ELLs -SWDs eat at the same tables and at the same time as the non-disabled students. They also play together at recess. By encouraging mainstream children to interact with ELL-SWDs, we are able to help these children achieve their IEP goals. : 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention plans for ELLs include AIS (Academic intervention services) and RTI ( Response to intervention). There are after school programs to work with students in grades 3-5 who are performing at Level 1 in math and/or literacy. These ELL student are entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding students who are below level on assessments, performance tasks and state tests. Our math and literacy specialists are very active and provide small group instruction for students who need additional support. Modeling strategies are used in Math, Literacy, Science and Social Studies. Other interventions include instructing students in academic language and writing non-fiction pieces. Differentiating instruction , simplifying language, simplified reading materials, using graphic organizers and pictures are also used in targeted intervention programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the next school year, we plan on continuing after school and Saturday enrichment. In 2018-19, we opened four Dual Language programs. Two in Kindergarten (Chinese) and two in third grade (Spanish). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are welcome to join in any activities that the school provides. The classroom teachers, ELL teachers, Administration and Parent Coordinator send translated letters home telling parents about the programs and calling parents to encourage them to send their children to these programs. Signs are posted outside the school as well. There are specific programs tailored to the needs of the ELL population. The school offers an after-school program for grades 1 to 5. The RTI program is also available for those students who need academic support services. The goals of these programs are to help the student in literacy, math and content area subjects through the use of supplemental activities and materials designed to improve the student's knowledge base and improve strategies to decode words, solve mathematical problems as well as improve comprehension in reading and academic language. Other services include , career day, wrestling, and this year our students are receiving dance. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently, we are using the Wilson Fundations program, and double dose phonics program , ReadyGen and Go Math. We also have the TEAM program that is specifically designed for ENL students, and Imagine Learning (English/Spanish). Houghton Mifflin Social Studies Series, Science Harcourt curriculum, Ready series . In terms of technology, the students use one-to-one technology of grades 2-5, and 10 iPads per classroom in grades K-1. The classrooms have Smart Boards, Promethean Boards, 2018-19 CEP 53  and Apple TV. They research subjects on the internet. They play internet games that reinforce math and literacy skills such as Imagine Learning, Imagine Math, MyOn, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is used in ENL classes on a need basis. Spanish story books and Spanish content area books are available in classrooms where there are ELLs. Math worksheets are available to students and teachers to assist non-English speaking students. There are also English/Spanish and English /Chinese picture dictionaries to assist these students as well. For The Dual Language Program, we use Cartilla phonics and tradebooks in English and Spanish. We, also use Spanish math books. If we did, we would have story books in the native language as well as content books in the native language . This would help students learn to read and further their concept development in their native language. Language arts books would also be needed to assist in NLA. In the Chinese Dual Language classes, the teacher translates the Balanced Literacy Curriculum, Go Math Curriculum and Science. The Dual Language classrooms all have Social Studies Passports in English/Spanish/Chinese. The Chinese Dual Language program supports their students using JoyReader, which teaches students how to read. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The support services are based on student needs, assessments and teacher input. Teachers, Administrators and other personnel take into consideration the students age and grade level in deciding whether an ELL student needs additional support services and which ones they need developmentally. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, we are using the Wilson Fundations program, and double dose phonics program , ReadyGen and Go Math. We also have the TEAM program that is specifically designed for ENL students, and Imagine Learning (English/Spanish). Houghton Mifflin Social Studies Series, Science Harcourt curriculum, Ready series . In terms of technology, the students use one-to-one technology of grades 2-5, and 10 iPads per classroom in grades K-1. The classrooms have Smart Boards, Promethean Boards, and Apple TV. They research subjects on the internet. They play internet games that reinforce math and literacy skills such as Imagine Learning, Imagine Math, MyOn, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and students are given a tour of the building. They also have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teachers during registration and orientations, support staff, Administrators and parent coordinator to express any concerns or needs before the child comes into the building. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The Dual Language model that our school uses is a side-by-side model. One self-contained english-only class and one self-contained spanish/chinese class. The classes alternate each day teaching 100% Spanish and 100% English.b. Math, science and social studies are taught in both languages. 2018-19 CEP 54  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S.13 has ongoing professional development which supports our school plan of moving ELL students along towards English language proficiency. We especially target for remedial instruction those students who have been stalled for two or more years on one proficiency level and those that may have dropped a level. The ENL Department plans at least 15% of all professional development sessions dedicated to ENL teachers.The ENL Classroom Teachers in grades K-5 will attend a professional development workshop by the ENL Liasions and an ENL teachers on Best Practices for ENLs. Professional Development is provided to all teachers with an emphasis on strategies to improve instruction of academic language for English Language Learners, the Integrated Co-Teaching, differentiating instruction, and using data to drive instruction. The ENL Liasion provides instructional support to students in the ENL and Bilingual Programs as well as staff development throughout the year.Professional Development Goals:• To provide ongoing professional development to staff in an effort to lift their levels of instruction and to build self-efficacy.• NYSESLAT – analyzing Spring 2018 data, give teachers who work with ENLs an overview of format and components of NYSESLAT• To provide professional development in the use of technology to enhance classroom instruction and students’ research opportunities• Native Language supports in the classroom As ENLs transition out of our school, P.S. 13 provides students' records to the staff of the new schools that they will be attending. In addition, our Guidance Counselors provide assistance and advice to students and parents on selecting and applying to schools that are the right fit for our ENL students. A minimum of 15% of the 35 hours mandated training for professional licenses are dedicated to ENL training. This training has an emphasis on strategies to improve instruction of academic language for English Language Learners and newly proficient learners. P.S.13 takes this responsibility very seriously because many of our Non-ENL students were at one time ELLs themselves and so all of our teachers will at one time or another be teaching this population . The professional development that is offered to teachers of ENLs in supporting ENLs as they engage in CCLS includes providing insights and strategies to help students answer questions, comprehend information taught as well as ways to provide help to those who have difficulties learning concepts. These professional developments include how to teach children to answer different kinds of questions,what information is needed to answer certain questions, simplifying language and text and vocabulary development These activities help teachers provide support to ENL students in class because the teacher has strategies to help students master the material taught. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support that we provide to staff(teachers and guidance counselors) to assist with the transition from elementary to middle school includes data on students and Portfolio assessments as well as binder assessments. The guidance counselor is given professional development on the NYSESLAT and reading the NYSESLAT scores from the ATS as well as information on ARIS for the ELL students. The ENL teachers also meet with guidance counselor to explain potential difficulties ELL parents and children may have in going to middle school and finding the right middle school. 15% of total hours of ENL training for all teachers and 50% hours for Bilingual Education/ ENL teachers will include in-house PDs, and District Workshops. Teachers and paraprofessionals will be provided with professional development on the process of becoming an English Language Learner, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing, Second Language Acquisition Theory, Strategies and Methodologies in ESL, Programs for ENLs, helping students meet the CCLS, and data for the ENLs. This is done on Staff Development days and grade meeting and conferences. Attendance sheets and agendas will be kept on file for all in-house staff workshops. 2018-19 CEP 55  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent and community involvement continues to be a major component of our school plan. Parents can see as they walk into P.S.13 a large Parent Information Bulletin Board which includes information about the curriculum calendar, school calendar, monthly activities, Elmhurst Community Library programs/ hours, along with Dial-a Teacher tutoring services. The Parent Coordinator teams up with the ENL Specialist as well as the Guidance Counselor, Literacy Coaches and the Math Coaches to provide workshops, at least once a week, on topics related to parents and education. Workshops presented in September and October this year include "Planning for Success: Learning about things you can do to have a successful year", "How to Help Your Child at Home in Reading and Math". The workshops include information on standardized tests, a family night of Math and Literacy games, health related topics, immigration, report cards, discipline code, parent- teacher conferences, and summer activities for parents and children. All parents are invited into school to share in their students successes. Parents will be invited to various school celebrations that will take place in the classroom. In March, the parents are invited to see a display of their children's artwork while taking a "Gallery Walk" which consists of student art work displayed throughout the hallways of the school. Additionally, the ENL, AIS, and Special Education departments meet to discuss student progress weekly. Teachers are available to meet with parents of struggling students and shared student work, reading levels, and teacher observations on Tuesdays. All workshops are translated into Spanish by the Parent Coordinator and into Chinese by one of the guidance counselors, Ms. Hsu. The Parent Coordinator, the ENL Specialist, and the ENL Teachers conduct parent orientations throughout the school year to assist parents in selecting the appropriate Bilingual/ ENL Programs for their children. Parents are shown a video which describes the programs available. The video is available in 12 languages as well as English. Parents receive assistance in completing the Parent Option Survey Form and have the opportunity to ask questions in their own language before making an informed choice. An orientation meeting is held in September and throughout the year to orient parents of newly enrolled kindergarten students. Parents are kept informed of school issues and activities with letters translated in all community languages. The DOE Translation Unit assists in translating memos to parents in many different languages as well as providing translations over the phone. P.S.13 partners with Ming Yuan Chinese School, a Community Based Organization, which provides after-school services to Chinese and non-Chinese speaking students. Ming Yuan's bilingual teachers provide tutoring, enrichment and homework help. Their students are grouped by grade level and focuses on homework help, enrichment/remediation, improving work habits, building stamina, giving individual attention, helping new immigrant students learn English, and teaching Chinese to all students P.S. 13 evaluates the needs of the parents by sending out school wide parent surveys, reviewing chancellor city-wide survey results, and by getting feedback direct from parents during Parent Association Meetings and Parent Orientation meetings. All Parent workshops and Parent Orientations end with an opportunity to fill out a Parent Feedback Form. The Parent Coordinator and ENL Specialist review these to get ideas for future workshops and presentations. P.S. 13 addresess the needs of its parents by closely attending to parent requests and comments stated in the Learning Environment Survey. Workshop requests are collected and are used for future workshop topics. Based on the results of these school and city-wide surveys along with feedback from parents directly, P.S.13 conducts various workshops to address the needs of the parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Involvement includes several activities throughout the school year. Events such as Math and Literacy Game night, Multicultural Night, Writing Celebrations, ENL workshops for parents, and ENL classes for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Evelyn Velez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Clement C. Moore School School DBN: 24Q013 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Evelyn Velez Title Principal Cheralene Kondel Assistant Principal Ms. B. Ramirez Parent Coordinator Ms. D. Varuzza ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Arango Parent Mrs. Rendino Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Cardillo Mrs. Calapai Mrs. Matos Mr. Torres Mrs. M. Chan Ms. Lin Mrs. Girin Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Reviewer Other Related Service Provider Ms. Mouzakitis Other Assistant Principal Mrs. Dugan Other AIS Provider Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9/26/18 9-26-18 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: PS13Q Superintendent: M The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S.13 uses different methodologies and data to assess language preferences of the parent community including Part III of the Home Language Survey, student emergency contact cards ATS reports of preferred languages , blue emergency cards and informal surveys conducted at our school.. The languages other than English include Spanish, Arabic, Bengali , Chinese, Urdu, and Russian. All communications to parents are translated into their home languages by support personnel who read, write and speak the appropriate languages. Home language is determined at the time the child is registered for the first time at our school through the use of the Home Language Survey. The ESL teacher or a pedogue determines the primary language by responses on the survey and through an oral interview. Records are kept in the office of each parent's primary language. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu,and Russian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The following documents that require translation at our school are monthly calendars, PA meeting notifications,newsletters, handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school information, New York State testing dates, student curriculum information, letters from the principal and teachers, and school discipline code information. Most are translated in house or done at the beginning, middle, and end of the school year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 61  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PS13 will have several face-to-face meetings with parents throughout the school year. These include Back to School Night in September, parent -teacher conferences in November, March, May, and on Tuesdays. ELL OrientationWorkshops throughout the school year. Middle School Meetings for Grade 5 in the Spring as well as NYS ELA and Math Informational meetings in March. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 deals with establishing procedures for making certain LEP parents are given opportunities to participate in and have access to services that will benefit their children. This is accomplished at our school by identifying students and parents who speak another language through the registration process which involves parents filling out the Home Language Survey. An interview is also conducted with the parent and the child at this time. Primary language is determined within 30 days of admission to the school. Records are kept in the office of parents who need translated copies of school calendars, notices, letters, and important school notifications. P.S. 253 provides and distributes important information in "covered languages "relating to registration, and selection, standards and performance, safety, conduct and discipline, placement in Special Education, ELL or non-standard academic programs as well as for transfers and discharges. The Parents' Bill of Rights is given out to parents in their native language and explained in their native language as well. There are translators in the school and through the DOE Translation Unit that are always ready to help parents. Outside agencies in the community are also available to help non-English speaking parents who require services as well. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms that P.S.13Q uses to gather feedback for parents on the quallity and availability of services include parent surveys. PS13 has an SLT ( school Leadership Team) which consists of a focus group inclusive of parents and teachers to gather feedback and discuss best practices. 2018-19 CEP 63 
