2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q014 School Name: P.S. 014 FAIRVIEW Principal: HEATHER BENSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 24Q014 The Fairview 342400010014 K,1,2,3,4,5 107-01 Otis Avenue Queens, NY 11368 718-699-6071 Phone Number: 718-699-3224 Fax: Heather Benson hbenson2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Heather Benson Tari Russo Miriam Morocho Espinoza Carla Widom Tameka Solomon n/a Angel Perez District Information Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 Avenue Queens, NY 11368 Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 592-3357 Phone Number: (718) 592-3357 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Field Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Lawrence Penergast Executive Director: Queens Plaza 28-11 Queens Plaza North,LIC11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-6152 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Heather Benson Tari Russo Miriam Espinoza Michele DeMasi TamekaSolomon *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Angel Perez, Director of Beacon CBO Representative, if applicable Carla Widom Bianca Bibiloni Claudine Webb Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ileana Bozzano HildaCardoso Marieni Sanchez RafaelinaTaveras KarinaHinostroza Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The PS 14 Mission is to create a community where students, parents, and staff work together to inspire leaders who innovate, own their learning, and empower one another so we can be our best selves. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Collaborations/Partnerships One community partner is Queens Museum. We completed 2 projects planned for this school year, including students in 13 classes school wide. Students’ work was shown at the museum in exhibits in May and June! We have implemented a partnership with Visual Thinking Strategies. Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS) is a method initiated by teacher-facilitated discussions of art images and documented to have a cascading positive effect on both teachers and students. It is perhaps the simplest way in which teachers and schools can provide students with key behaviors sought by Common Core Standards: thinking skills that become habitual and transfer from lesson to lesson, oral and written language literacy, visual literacy, and collaborative interactions among peers. We partner with The Queens-based NY Hall of Science. ELL Parents will continue to attend workshops at NYSCI as well. We are a Beacon school, changing the playing field for our entire community of learners. Our partner is NY Edge, formerly Sports and Arts in Education Foundation. Initiatives include: * soccer * basketball * dance * bocci *art *theater * homework help * academic extensions and support * ENL classes for parents * HSE classes * test prep classes (HSHAT, SAT) * immigration/ housing/ legal support 2018-19 CEP 10  Special Initiatives The PD Committee has 4 strands of ongoing support to offer teachers: Rigor, Curriculum, Inquiry, and Data Analysis. We have implemented a Lunchroom Leader program where students have a goal of collecting as many stickers as they can during the month to be a Lunchroom Leader. They earn stickers by using showing leadership skills in the cafeteria. Classes that earn at least 15 stickers in one month are acknowledged during the morning announcements. The class with the most stickers in one month is added to our Lunchroom Leaders Bulletin Board outside the cafeteria. We have an attendance initiative where we award classes with the highest attendance each month with a special prize. We also give out attendance ribbons daily to all classes that have 100 percent attendance. Parents of absent and late students are contacted daily through Blackboard Connect. If a grade achieves 97 percent attendance across a whole month, then the principal will dye her hair a color of their choice. We are continuing the Franklin-Covey program Leader in Me: Seven Habits of Highly Successful Kids across all 6 grades to promote positive culture building. We have a Culture Coordinator (dean) supporting in class structures to support students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ELLs - 30% of our population SWDs 17% of our population Based on the data from the most recent state test scores our special education and ELL students performed lower than the rest of the school student population. Our All Students ELA pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 28.6% Our All Students math pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 31.6% Our All Students science pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 78.2% 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths Our strengths include teachers collecting data to help organize small group instruction. Our teachers meet voluntarily on their common prep times to work as a PLC to analyze curriculum and collaborate on lessons. We have created many committees this school year; SLT, Culture, Green Team, Attendance, PD, Consultation, ESL, SIT/RTI, Testing, BRT, Vertical, and Newcomers. Challenges Our challenges include large class sizes and overcrowding. There is no room for a science laboratory nor for a proper music room. We are moving a classroom into the old teacher's lounge, and APs are being displaced to share offices with the guidance team. Space is a tremendous concern of ours. 2018-19 CEP 11  Growth We have made the most growth with coming together as a school community. In past years, most grades met in isolation with no alignment from grade to grade. This year with all of our action teams and with creating a shared vision and 5-year plan, we have begun to align what is happening across the grade levels. We have unified our curricula: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project; Passport in Social Studies; GoMath; Leader in Me. New this year we are implementing Amplify Science. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q014 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1691 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 128 128 61 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 28 61 61 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 83.2% % Reduced Lunch 31.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 88.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 74% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 133 133 61 94.1% 0.9% 17.2% 2.4% 6.9% 0.7% 8 22% 8.4 32.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs: ● Based on the data from the most recent state test scores our special education and ELL students performed lower than the rest of the school student population. Our All Students ELA pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 28.6% Our All Students math pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 31.6%* Our All Students science pass rate of levels 3 +4 is 78.2% ● Additionally we have a concern in the increase of stamina and rigor of the Common Core State Math Exams as well as the new learning standards for ELA. * we have transitioned to Algebra 4 All, a more concept based instructional philosophy. However, 9 teachers out of 66 have been trained in this manner.  The CSD24 Goal for ELA, Math, and Science promotes students across the district achieving a 5 point improvement in Math for All Students, and 10 point bumps for ELL and SWD students. We need to support that growth in our school as well. Strengths: 2018-19 CEP 14  ● GoMath Curriculum has been adopted and implemented and is aligned to the CCLS. We are in year 3, and teachers are more comfortable with this program now than in the past. ● Specialized Math AP and math coach to supervise math instruction and PD. * Although they scored lower than "All Students", our ELLs and SWDs outperformed the years prior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, instruction in math will be aligned to the Next Generation Standards to engage students in grade appropriate tasks (embedded in units of study) that promote mathematical reasoning and problem solving in order to improve proficiency in the Math State Exam by 6 points in grades 3, 4, and 5 for All Students tp 38%, inclusive of the sub-group populations, but with a 10 point increase for our ELL students and Students with Disabilities. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will attend professional development training on developing strategies for differentiation from borough based and central based NYCDOE learning opportunities including Algebra4All and GoMath support. Specialized Math AP and math coach will be available for assisting teachers. Math Coach will act as mentors for peers in vertical teams to support math instruction across the faculty. Math mentors will organize intervisitations as well as half day workshops with the AP STEM to share and develop math instruction strategies and math practices. We will apply for the same A4A grant to obtain a math staff developer from A4A as we did last year. * Through the departmentalized teams we will use baseline data such as math performance task work and student work to evaluate the A4A projects’ targeted student progress and the impact of strategies we are using. Data collected from pre/post assessments, class work, homework, and low inference observations will support our instructional strategies for monitoring their effectiveness. This will be accomplished during teacher planning periods, common preparation periods, and Monday afternoon PDs to monitor and revise alignment of standards to the curriculum. There will also be Before - School and After-School Test Preparation to support the students. Beacon's After school program will support the students in math as well. * Mastery Connect will be used for data collection and data analysis to support teachers' planning and d Use of instructional strategies such as data driven math remediation, peer tutoring, UDL strategies, and multiple Entry Points to support the subgroups in the CCLS Math Curricula. Continuation of two Vertical Teams: ● Data specialists – one per grade – meet regularly to align assessments, to analyze data across grades and across the Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant principals and Math Coach Math Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 AP STEM and math Coach Special Education and ELL students Sept 2018- June 2019 Monday afternoons Math coach, Teachers of Special Education and ELL students Students and ELLs Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant principals, Math Coach and Special Education & ESL teachers 2018-19 CEP 16 school, and to design and implement a school wide grading policy. ● Curriculum liaisons/Grade Team Leaders – one per grade – meet regularly to align curriculum across grades and to communicate high expectations to families. * Continue the use of an ELL Newcomer Strategies meeting the schools’ plans to improve math proficiencies for the StateMath exams in grades 3, 4, and 5. They will play a supporting role through parent contact on Tuesday afternoons and during the several scheduled conferences throughout the school year. The importance of their increased involvement in their child’s class and homework each night. Involve, engage, and educate families to deepen their understanding of Rigorous Instruction so that they can support their children at home, we will provide workshops on alternating Tuesday afternoons, May 14 Leadership Day, and in parent workshops on alternating Friday mornings held by the Parent Coordinator. Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant principals, Math Coach and Special Education & ESL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize our Parent Engagement time, Beacon Community Outreach personnel, our PTA and our SLT to communicate to our families. We will post the CEP goal and action plan on the school website at PS14inCorona.org. We also send home a newsletter monthly. We use a phone system to connect to families as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL funds – AP STEM Position TL funds – Math Coach Position Substitutes for Teachers to attend PD, Scheduling, Professional development Opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 17  Title III funds for PD and materials / manipulatives for Go Math learning tasks. TL funds for Saturday program, 3 teachers x 9 days x 4 hours (Grades K-5) (January – April) TL funds for Grade Team Leaders, 6 teachers (one per grade) x 10 weeks x 1 hour TL funds for Data Specialist Liaisons, 6 teachers x in school period/.week TL funds for Testing Team to ensure accurate data collection on formative and summative exams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, more than 60% of students will be on or above grade level in math as evidenced by progress in GoMath/Mastery Connect pre- and post unit assessments. Teachers grades K-5 will collect, analyze and share unit baselines Teachers grades 3 – 5 will give the Math Mock Exam in February to assess growth plus need, using DOE math tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math State exams, including mock test for benchmarking. The Math state exams align directly to this goal and can be used as a formative assessment to show growth across the year. The mock exam is formative. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs:  Based on the data from the most recent state test scores, as well as TC running records, our special education and ELL students performed lower than the rest of the student population.  Only 28% of students overall passed the ELA exam with a level 3 or 4.  We continue to struggle to prepare students for the increased demands of the Common Core Standards and the accompanying State Exams. Strengths:  Teachers have integrated the use of new TCRWP Phonics Units of Study in K and Fundations in 1-2 into their everyday practice in order to bolster the foundational reading skills.  The transition to TCRWP was smooth and thorough. All classes now teach reading and writing units of study that promote literacy and volume in writing.  The School Implementation/Response to Intervention Team (SIT/RTI) streamlines methods for identifying, servicing and tracking students with behavioral and academic needs in order to provide more effective interventions.  The school has begun to embrace the Leader In Me, including a Climate Coordinator, philosophy of “being proactive” and the environment itself has literally changed with numerous murals being installed all over the building.  Our Literacy Coach has worked to support teachers and gather and organize materials for Guided Reading and academic intervention in the classroom.  Two new Universal Literacy Coaches support teachers in grades K-2.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve proficiency in the ELA State Exam by 6 points in grades 3, 4, and 5 to 34% passing for All Students, inclusive of the sub-group populations, but with a 10 point increase for our ELL students and Students with Disabilities. Student achievement in ELA will improve through the integration of more effective independent reading 2018-19 CEP 19  and guided reading opportunities set forth in the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing curriculum as well as the collaborative, whole school tracking of independent reading levels and a writing focus. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers across the school will attend professional learning opportunities offered by Teacher’s College as well as Central and District entities in order to more effectively support students in meeting the rigorous demands of the Common Core Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 We will work collaboratively with Teacher’s College on-site coaches so that we can effectively continue TC with fidelity. There will be a minimum of three lab sites within the school where best practices can be observed and shared with the school community. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 The School Implementation/Response to Intervention Team will be proactive in providing support to students based on tracking data. Special Education and ELL students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Use of instructional strategies such as guided reading, UDL strategies, and multiple Entry Points to support the subgroups in the ELA Curricula, including a phonics program in K developed by TCRWP to improve reading results. Special Education and ELL students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant principals, Literacy Coach Principal and Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach Principal, Supervisor of Special Education (AP), SIT Team, Climate Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, and Special Education & ESL teachers Continuation of two Vertical Teams: ● Data specialists – one per grade – meet regularly to align assessments, to analyze data across grades and across the school, and to design and implement a school wide grading policy. ● Curriculum liaisons/Grade Team Leaders – one per grade – meet regularly to align curriculum across grades and to communicate high expectations to families. Lexia, Compass, Myon, TC Reading and Writing Project Running Records, Ticket to Read and Imagine Learning will be used to collect students’ reading data. We will continue to enhance the effectiveness of our 4 Coaches by sending them to intense coaching professional development provided by Teacher’s College. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 3 Literacy Coaches, AP Lit,and Principal 2018-19 CEP 21 The school will build on existing Leader in Me structures to include a school-wide reading goal. Teachers, Parents, Students, Administration Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize our Parent Engagement time, Beacon Community Outreach personnel, our PTA and our SLT to communicate to our families. We also send home a newsletter monthly. We have 5 parent nights planned across the year. We will use Learning Leaders to communicate as well. We use a phone system to connect to families as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Funds – Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Curriculum, Resources and Training TL Funds – Fundations resources TL Funds – Literacy Coach Position TL additional Response to Intervention Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, more than 60% of students will be on or above grade level in ELA. Teachers grades K-5 will collect, analyze and share Running Record baselines. Teachers grades 3 – 5 will give the ELA mock Exam in December 2017 to assess growth plus need. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA mock exams, Running Records, and ELA state exams. City ELA tasks as benchmarks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 3b, using questioning and discussion techniques, the overall ratings this year were 11% Developing across all ratings (which is down from 15% in 2015-16!). We will continue to work to build teachers’ skills in 3c, engaging students where we scored 10% Developings. We will develop additional supports and techniques to deepen student understanding. High-quality questions encourage students to make connections among concepts or events previously believed to be unrelated and to arrive at new understandings of complex material. The habit “seek first to understand, then to be understood” will be used as a model for discussion. Our focus to improve on 3b will coincide with our focus on TC and the Leader in Me programs being implemented into the school. Strengths ● Teachers meet once a week in common planning time. ● Teachers created a school wide inquiry cycle for studying student work together, ● Teachers meet on their own and with support from administration. ● Teachers invite each other into classrooms to observe best practices. Needs ● There are 1untenured teachers on staff.  10% of teachers were rated developing in 3c (down one point) and 4% were rated developing in 3d. ● According to an analysis of student performance of ELA and math written responses, more than 50% of students struggle in writing and specifically, more than 70% of students struggle with writing from sources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will be provided on-going, job-embedded professional development in designing action research projects and utilizing inquiry protocols in order to achieve an MOTP rating of either effective or highly effective measured by the specific components of the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching: 4E: Growing and Developing Professionally. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom teachers will participate in at least one outside PD session and then “turn-key” to their own grade, including: Teachers College workshops; Visual Thinking Strategies; Arts Trainings; A4A; PLOs with the Borough; LIM strategies; TCIS and Cognito trainings Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept., 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Presentations at PTA meetings to discuss current curriculum topics. This is in addition to what is being sent out in the monthly newsletter. APs will attend PTA meetings regularly. PTA meeting attendees Sept., 2018-June 2019 H. Benson, Principal and J. Chatterton, Annex site Supervisor and all APs Teachers Sept., 2018-June 2019 School Administration Ongoing Inter-Class and Inter-School visitation will be conducted to provide teachers with support and coaching in the areas of instructional best practices, lesson structure and student engagement. These trainings include support for ENL strategies, SWD supports and differentiated support for all students to meet them where they are. As an example one of the "lab sites" used for our Teachers College Reading and Writing Project work is in an ESL classroom. All teachers on the grade will observe strategies in action and explore ways to bring those ideas into their own classes to support ESL teachers. Teachers will receive reflective comments and feedback from Administration and peers to collaborate how to implement the strategies they are learning in professional development trainings. Teachers created a school wide inquiry cycle for studying professional texts together, beginning with texts self selected by teacher teams, using the GALE on line text resource provided for free by the DOE. All Admins, Teachers, Paras. Sept., 2018-June 2019 PD Committee Collaborative Team Inquiry will engage in analyzing student work and reflecting on instructional practices along with weekly in-house professional development provided during common preparation periods and weekly on Monday afternoons Data Inquiry and Professional development time. Teachers need access to computers and on line tools in order to plan, collaborate, create, and present inquiry and grade team projects. Classroom teachers Sept., 2018-June 2019 School Administration and PD Committee 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tuesday afternoons 1 x month at 6 pm, teachers, counselors and the Beacon directors will present relevant Parent Workshops to support family engagement and conversation. Additional Support will be provided by the Beacon program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 35 per diem days will be used to allow teachers to attend off site PD. TL money will go towards materials and books for workshops and for children and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb 1, 2019: ●fewer complaints about colleagues will have been reported. * fewer complaints from parents about adults in the building will have been reported. *teachers will report an increased sense of collegiality as evidenced by Monday LIM action team presentations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson advance data and progress towards faculty growth in 4E. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In UFT consultation, "Safety" was a concern at several sessions across the year. We only had 33% of parents complete the Parent Survey, so we can improve data by improving response rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers, parents and students will understand and be able to explain one shared understanding of the role that leadership development plays in discipline and behavior so that our discipline issues and OORS reports decrease by 10 percent. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The vision work will extend into classrooms and be shared home with families: Classrooms will adopt the vision to create their own class mission statements using Leader in Me philosophies and systems. These will be posted outside of classrooms and will align to the overall school vision. These class mission will also align to students' personalized Leadership Binders. Culture coordinator is now in the program, during the school day as well, and supports teachers and staff with safety and a positive environment for learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and students Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal teachers and staff Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal and Climate Coordinator The website will reflect one clear vision that will be reiterated in PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and the Family Nights. Teachers and PTA Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal Instructional Cabinet meetings will take place after school for per session 1 x month to create school wide / vertical messaging aligned to one vision. Grade team leaders and admins Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal The school will adopt a "WIG" or Wildly Important Goal a la Leader in Me, designed by the Leadership Team and all teachers. All PS 14 constituencies Sept., 2018-June 2019 Benson and LIghthouse Team and APs as role models 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize our Parent Engagement time, Beacon Community Outreach personnel, our PTA and our SLT to communicate to our families. We also send home a newsletter monthly. 2018-19 CEP 29  We use a phone system to connect to families as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Culture Coordinator is a full time teacher position, so FSF will support this role. Some enrichment for Beacon will be provided by the school using per session dollars: 20 weeks x 10 classes x 1 hour per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018, all classes will have a mission statement posted that reflects the school vision. By January 2018 all students and all teachers and all admins will have current Leadership Binders reflecting their progress monitoring toward both a school wide goal (Ten Million Minutes or reading across the school) and individual "WIGs" or "Wildly Important Goals". Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey Student and Class Leadership Binders Data boards with progress towards 10 million minutes of reading. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:Needs ● Based on our Learning Environment parent survey only 82% of our parents feel that the school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extra-curricular activities, and services. ● Many parents come into school daily to seek after-school programs/clubs and tutoring services in which to enroll their children.  Parents are requesting more transparent and clear communication between home and school. ● Parents need to have more training workshops on parenting, handling students with “aggressive” behaviors, using technology, and homework help. Strengths: ● SLT includes parents who share decision making with the school. ● Family worker teaches English to 35+ parents Monday through Thursday mornings. Leadership opportunities for parents  Parent Nights with Student-led conferences and a menu of workshops for parents to select to attend.   Website at PS14inCorona.org  Learning Leaders Parent Volunteers that have been trained in the “Leader in Me” and work in classrooms along with teachers to support learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 31  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers, students, and families will engage in workshops and assemblies to deepen our work around building a positive culture, including a culture of trust, in our school, as evidenced by improvement in the Learning Environment Survey scores for Family Engagement from 82% positive to 90% positive overall. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Hire a School Climate Coordinator, separate from the Leadership Co-Chairs to support classroom behavior mods and support for teachers to manage students. This teacher will help coordinate activities at lunch as well to ensure positive interactions among students. Selection of approximately 15-20 ENL students to participate in an after-school program with Queens Museum, which includes parents visiting the museum with the students to see them present their final project. Continue the Leader in Me Program to train teachers to implement an advisory weekly with all students using the Franklin/Covey Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. We will use Franklin Covey designed pre- and post- assessment data to monitor success of the programas well as Leadership notebooks for each student to monitor success of the program. Also to continue to grow and train the Learning Leaders to include parents at the OPS 14Q Annex. Parents participate in workshops during PTA meetings and during evening Parent Nights, as well as on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement TIme. Hiring and training of a teacher for a per session activity to support the students in the program and to extend/offer the program to be held at the school next school year. Also to write about the activities of the program in the school monthly newspaper sent to parents. Obtaining opportunities for parents to assist with museum visitations. Offer workshops on Tuesdays for parents of students involved in the programs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs, School Climate Coordinator, Aides ELL Students Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal & with Ms. Webb. All Students and Learning Leaders Volunteers Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal and The Lighthouse Team, and PTA Teacher Sept., 2018-June 2019 Principal & Asst. Principal Parents Sept., 2018-June 2019 Queens Museum Staff & Principal ESL and computer and exercise/dance and nutrition and bullying classes for parents will run evenings and weekends. Parents Beacon will provide additional services to parents in the evenings, weekends, and holidays. slt Sept., 2018-June 2019 Sept., 2018-June 2019 Family Worker Beacon Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 33  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts in the Schools Foundation Queens Museum Queens Community House Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Theater Materials and Arts Materials to support advisory related projects ● Materials for presentations to families and for the ESL Parent Classes. * TL for Dean (School Climate Coordinator) ● Student incentives are provided though funding from the School Fund for improving attendance and behavior. ● Leader in Me program with further training. ● Leadership notebooks with tabs for each administrator, teacher, and student to set goals and monitor progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018 we will show a 10% drop in OORS reports from January 2018- to January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data on student incidents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades 4 & 5-score of 1 on State Test Grades K-3-Level 2 or below on TC Running Records Grades 4 & 5-score of 1 on state test Grades K-3-as needed by teacher recommendation As Needed-all grades Social Studies As needed –all grades At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Observation by teacher, Guidance Counselor, school psychologist or parent request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Programs such as: Starfall, My-On, Award Reading, Great Leaps, Voyager Passport, Guided reading Programs such as: Go-Math, and other web-based programs Compass Learning Amplify, and Curriculum associates Programs Herff-Jones, Blast-Off Social Studies, Curriculum Associates Programs Parent workshops, Low-Inference class observations, speech, counseling, SETTS, OT, PT Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group & One to one instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day, after-school, in class, and Saturday Academy Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction During school day, flexible grouping, after-school, and Saturday Academy During school day-flexible grouping During school day-Flexible grouping Small Group and one to one instruction During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 100 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At risk counseling; inclusion in monitors program; inclusion in early bird, after school and (for title III students) Saturday school; Inclusion in clubs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 14 will participate in citywide job fairs, check new teacher postings and interview ATRs. We will tap resources at our partner colleges. PD is designed to ensure that all teachers are supported and feel connected to the school community. New teachers participate in “First Fridays” which are meetings designed to assist them in navigating the road to tenure and to find success in the first years of teaching. Leader in Me focuses on developing the whole person: adults and children alike. Each semester we hold "Cookies, Cakes and Committees" where we bring dessert, set up coffee and celebrate our PS 14 faculty. Teachers engage weekly in common planning time. 2018-19 CEP 38  Inquiry Teams are teacher designed. All teachers sit on at least one culture building activity as well as one inquiry team to develop a strong academic culture. This keeps all adults connected to the work and to each other. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS 14Q provides a strong PD program for all teachers and paraprofessionals. PDs are provided by master teachers, assistant principals, and teachers who turnkey off site professional development workshops that they have attended outside of the school. The faculty also attend Grade Common Planning periods weekly. PDs are geared toward areas of need as identified by staff and administration. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 14 partners with pre- schools whose students articulate to PS 14. Parents and children visit the school to tour classrooms and to learn about the curriculum. All materials are published in English and Spanish, and many are published in Chinese as well. Our pupil accounting secretary is in contact with pre-school offices so that we can ensure seamless transition of records, including Turning 5s. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 39  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. There are 29 effectively functioning committees with representation across the grades. These committees lend voices to teachers in the school, including: ● the MOSL Committee to design assessments ● the vertical team, to align curriculum across grades as well as to the CCLS, including rubrics ● the Professional Development Team to design Inquiry team support, assessment and data analysis support, and mini-workshops for teachers across myriad topics and taught by teachers for teachers 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 9,12 12 12 9, 12, 15, 17, 20 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 943,256 224717 68686 0 9,503279 X X X NA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 14, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 14Q The Fairview School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 14Q The Fairview School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 46  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Newcomer and Immigrant Students in kindergarten through fifth grade will be enrolled in the Imagine Learning Program License on the computer. These students will be given username and passcode for individualized instruction in English with built-in assessments on each level. Students will be able to navigate ELA topics on their levels. Teachers will be able to print handouts of student progress and areas of strengths and weaknesses. The Imagine Learning License will also be a supplement to the Saturday ENL Academy as well as the students' classrooms. The Saturday ELL Academy will last from January 5, 2019 through April 13, 2019. Classes will start at 8:30am and end at 11:30am (12 sessions for a total of 30 hours). The Saturday ENL Academy is staffed by ENL certified teachers. All ENL students in PS 14 from grades 1-5 are invited to the program. ENL students will be given additional instruction in ELA, including grammar, vocabulary, reading, and speaking. Students will also be exposed to music, theater, science, and movement activities. There will be a total of 12 teachers, one supervisor, a school aide, and a paraprofessional (if needed for Special Education ENL students) for the Saturday Program. The three hour classes will include Vocabulary development, Common Core Learning in the modalities of reading, writing, speaking, and listening, and reading and mathematics enrichment and support. Teachers will differentiate instruction using Computer-based programs, small group instruction, and heavy picture support as a means of addressing individual student needs. Materials for this program will include NYSESLAT practice materials (Finish Line for Ell's from Continental Press), Common Core Math materials, and the Imagine Learning License Program on-line ENL instruction. The data shows that our ENL students need additional instruction in these areas with extra support given to reading and writing. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III Immigrant Funds Professional Development program will focus on providing teachers in the ENL Academy with additional supports and planning opportunities to meet the needs of their students. EDAT data on students will be analyzed by the teachers to plan instruction. Professional development will consist of the following topics: ENL stages of language development, analysis of data,test taking strategies for ENl students, ENl strategies for students to succeed in Math, Writing, and Reading, and how students should navigate translated tests and how to use word-to-word dictionaries. Professional development sessions are given the 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development week before the program begins, and the week after the program ends. (Wed, December 19 & Wed, April 17). Teachers will also be trained on how to administer and score the pre and post assessment for the program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent engagement activities will enable parents/guardians to learn more about their children's curriculum, learning environment and school wide activities. During the 2018-19 school year, we will hold out-reach workshops for parents (with Parent Coordinator, Cristina Cruz, 3 X month), English classes for parents, and counseling partnerships with parents. Parents can choose from a beginner English class emphasizing survival communication and basic reading for parents, or an advanced class for parents which includes reading, advanced vocabulary, idioms and writing. Classes meet four times a week and are well attended by parents of our ELL population. Parents are sent fliers in multiple languages about the classes and posters are put up in the main lobby and outside in the public announcement boards in the school garden. Parents of Hispanic ELLs will have translation by a Spanish speaking teacher, and paraprofessional or school aide during meetings. Parents who speak lower incidence languages will have fliers, and directions translated by computer or the translation unit over the telephone. Parent English classes are taught by Loretta D'Amato 4 times per week and will begin November 17, 2014, and continue into June. Embedded in this work are strategies that parents can use to support students at home with homework, reading, and writing. This will support higher achievement of ELL. Tuesday afternoon workshops are geared toward teaching direct strategies for parents to use to support students at home. One title which we repeat for different grades throughout the year is "How to Help your ___ Grader in Reading" Select Tuesdays, 2:30 - 3:40 Agendas and records are kept by the teachers who provide the workshops as evidence of their professional growth. New this year, we have copies in the principals office of the workshops provided to all staff and parents as well, by grade. Parental Engagement will consist of workshops to be scheduled and given by certified ENL providers on helping their students at home. Other service providers can also give advice to parents regarding assistance for ENL students. The week after the ENL Academy ends, parents are invited to come and meet with the ENL Teachers to discuss individual student progress from 10:00-11:30am). Parents will also be given a progress report on the strengths, weaknesses, and next steps for their children. 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name The Fairview School Borough Queens School Number 014 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Heather Benson Coach Theresa Colleary ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Guiterrez / gr 1 ICT Teacher/Subject Area Claudine Webb Teacher/Subject Area L. Gerard/ gr 3 Related-Service Provider J LaRosa Superintendent M. Chan Assistant Principal Janine Chatterton Coach Loretta Fabricant School Counselor I. Leon Parent Miriam Espinoza Parent Coordinator Cristina Cruz Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 9 10 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 6 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 9 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1703 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 532 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.24%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-19 1 K 2 0 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 3 1 0 1 4 2 0 2 2 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 9 0 0 0 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELLs' early literacy skills are assessed through various tools - TCRWP Assessments enable teachers to get a clear, useful picture of a student's early learning skills. Running Records Assessments are also included. This gives teachers data regarding guided reading levels for instruction, independent reading levels for stamina and specific skills data in order to differentiate instruction and group work. Bilingual classes use Estrellita, and we will use the DOE periodic assessment NYSESLAT benchmark exams 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? * saturday academy exclusively for ELLS * A team of data specialists to support the use of EDAT data and formative assessment data 2018-19 CEP 54  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The success of the ELL program is evaluated by looking at both formative and summative assessments, the NYSESLAT and ELL Periodic Assessment as well as student work portfolios, running records and project based rubrics. The Newcomers class is also evaluated in terms of how many and how quickly students move from the silent stage to the emergent stage of language acquisition. We know our program is successful here because in recent years ELLs have made their AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? * Per session hours are set aside to analyze data and to plan interventions with Title III program teachers * the SIT team meets with teachers to create/ assign interventions for students at risk *Saturday program from January to April is data informed and open to all ELLs * The bilingual department meets monthly with the AP ELLs to review programming and lessons 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S.14Q uses data collected on the ELLs to determine the level RTI support needed when they struggle with language acquisition. The interventions used are systematically applied and derived from best practices in instruction of ELLs. Data used includes summative test results from NYSESLAT and/or State Exams, diagnostic assessments, formative ongoing assessments, classroom work samples with rubrics and attendance. This data allows us to provide multiple entry points. Beside screening, P.S.14Q provides a strong core instructional program in Tier 1 by qualified instructors which develops language and literacy across the curriculum. Along with the core instructional program is the school's instructional focus of linking student's background knowledge and everyday lives to the content. Tier 2 and Tier 3 provides the intervention needed by children not progressing on target. A monitoring and revising of our intervention is always present in our support of ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT proficiency levels shows that kindergarteners taking the test in spring 2017 made gains from the year prior, allowing for more students to maintain or improve their level. We had 16 more students demonstrate proficiency in 2017 (Commanding) than we did the year prior. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data team disseminates ELA, Math, Science, and NYSESLAT data to each teacher for their classes, including cluster teachers and push in / pull out teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We apply a push in model primarily, though there are pull out as best serves the child; groups are set by grade level and NYSESLAT Proficiencey levels 2018-19 CEP 55  ELL self-contained classes and Bilingual classes receive the mandated number of instructional ESL minutes during their ELA and Reading periods daily, as well as content based ENL. Spanish bilingual classes deliver NLA for one period daily (50 minutes). Bilingual classes also deliver 2 periods (100 minutes) daily of ELA using ESL Strategies including vocabulary, grammar and English usage. Self-contained classes encompass beginner, intermediate and advanced students. All students get the maximum amount of ESL instructional minutes (100 minutes daily) because teachers use ESL methodology throughout the day. Push-in ELL teachers work with ELL students during their ELA periods by grouping all the ELLs together making sure they receive the instructional minutes they are entitled to. Newcomers, less than one year, are given the opportunity to receive instruction in an ungraded newcomers class specifically designed for the purpose of transitioning students into the new school environment. Language acquisition is a priority in this class enabling students to move from the silent stage into the emergent language stage. Additionally, newcomer students who are required to take the state exams are provided additional support through RTI Tier 2 and Tier3, After School ELA/Math Test Review and the Saturday Academy. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students are enrolled in whole class; by grade; class travels as a group; 1 period / day NLA integrating SS and Science into NLA; heterogeneous groupings. In Spanish Bilingual classes, content areas are delivered in both English and Spanish aligned to the L1 and L2 levels in the class. Vocabulary is delivered in both languages. Students are tasked with answering questions in groups - sharing in English and Spanish. Students also are led through higher order questions for math, social studies and science ensuring a deeper understanding of the content and using academic vocabulary orally. TBE teachers use pictures, charts, maps, content academic vocabulary words walls and timelines in order to make lessons more visual for students. Students are also instructed in the use of graphic organizers to help consolidate their thoughts. ESL teachers also use visuals and manipulatives to support ELL students in content area subjects. Sheltered English provides ELLs with content area instruction on their grade level. Teachers in ELL classes build on students prior knowledge, demonstrate and increase their wait time for answers, giving ELLs time to formulate their answers. Teachers also model answers using academic vocabulary. ELL students are provided content area - word to word glossaries in their language in order to support higher level questioning in content areas. Additionally, the common core shifts can be seen in these classes as ELL students are introduced to evidence-based questions and answers which are supported by informational text and the continued use of academic vocabulary. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs whose proficiency levels are EN and EM are provided 360 minutes a week of content area and ENL components designed to develop skills in speaking, reading, writing and listening in English. Students with proficiency levels of TR and EX are provided 180 minutes per week and commanding level students are provided at least 90 minutes of ENL instruction a week to help them transition. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In Spanish Bilingual classes, content areas are delivered in both English and Spanish aligned to the L1 and L2 levels in the class. Vocabulary is delivered in both languages. Students are tasked with answering questions in groups - sharing in English and Spanish. Students also are led through higher order questions for math, social studies and science ensuring a deeper understanding of the content and using academic vocabulary orally. TBE teachers use pictures, charts, maps, content academic vocabulary words walls and timelines in order to make lessons more visual for students. Students are also instructed in the use of graphic organizers to help consolidate their thoughts. ESL teachers also use visuals and manipulatives to support ELL students in content area subjects. Sheltered English provides ELLs with content area instruction on their grade level. Teachers in ELL classes build on students prior knowledge, demonstrate and increase their wait time for answers, giving ELLs time to formulate their answers. Teachers also model answers using academic vocabulary. ELL students are provided 2018-19 CEP 56  content area - word to word glossaries in their language in order to support higher level questioning in content areas. Additionally, the common core shifts can be seen in these classes as ELL students are introduced to evidence-based questions and answers which are supported by informational text and the continued use of academic vocabulary. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers in Bilingual classes give tests in Spanish in conjunction with their content area instruction. Teachers also give translated versions of the diagnostic tests available. Teachers use informal evaluation and transition to more English as the school year progresses. Bilingual teachers assess their students NLA with vocabulary tests and reading levels in Spanish, students are assessed at their entry level in NLA and grouped accordingly. Formal assessments include translated math test, science tests and social studies. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a. SIFE students are given small group instruction, targeting the area of need for that individual student. Early reading readiness skills are addressed and instruction in basic routines and rituals provide transition into our school for these students. b. Newcomers (0-3) in self-contained ELL classes and Bilingual classes are held to the same CCLS in both Math and English. These students are given instruction including teacher and peer modeling, academic and content vocabulary with pictures and or symbols, a simplified rubric of what is expected and individual attention for editing. c. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years are also held to CCLS standards in both ELA and Math. These students are also given strong exposure to academic vocabulary and glossaries to help them with content area information. They are provided with extension of services to continue their English acquisition. Extended time for testing and separate location are also given for high stakes tests. Students are provided with additional writing skills development to ensure their success. d. Long-term ELLs (completed 6+ years) are given additional one on one intervention in the modality they need. They have access to MyOn and Ticket to Read. e. Former ELLs are given an additional 90 minutes of ENL support for two years after they reach proficiency. Commanding ELLs are supported in reading and writing by ENL teachers and also given additional time to complete standardized tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: Teachers of ELL-SWDs provide targeted Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions to those students who need more support. Teachers also use native language support if needed. Teachers use graphic organizers to aid students with content area lessons and intensify use of content area vocabulary. ELL-SWDs need organizational skills developed in order to build on their knowledge. Teachers help them learn how to organize and retrieve information in content area lessons. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: ELL-SWDs who are in Special Education classes are mainstreamed into general education classes for content area instruction as per their IEP. This flexibility has worked well with ELL-SWDs who need the additional support of a self-contained class, but are on grade level with some content area subjects. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 57  Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: To ensure that our ELL population has an adequate opportunity to acquire a second language the following targeted interventions are being implemented; participation of ELLs in the RTI Program using Passport/Voyager, Ticket to Read, Myon, Imagine Learning, Fundations, Go Math and Ready Gen Phonics. ELLs participate in the Saturday Academy and use technology to support their learning. They are provided with differentiated instruction in small groups and flexible grouping. RTI provides At-Risk ELL students additional practice to support their language needs. Support ranges depending on student need, two or more periods per week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will use the periodic assessments for NYSESLAT for 2018-19. We partner with the D24 office specialists for bilingual ed. Imagine Learning will continue with the 25 licenses we have currently. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs in our school have access to a Saturday Academy which is designed to supplement academic achievement. The three hour, weekly program uses ELL strategies to supplement Math and ELA skills as well as ESL modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. The small group setting allows teachers and students to focus in on areas of need. All ELLs also have the opportunity to join clubs and participate in the Arts Program at school. Students are also invited to a Summer ELL Program which enables them to build on L2 acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLs are: TCRWP, Ticket to Read, Compass LEarning, Lexia, MyOn, PBSKid.org, GoMath, NYSESLAT Practice Booklets, Shared Reading, Imagine Learning, ABCYA.com, Fundations and Starfall.com. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? TBE: Instruction in students' native language as well as ESL component. Vocabulary in L1 and L2 and clear directions in L1 and L2. ESL: Instruction is in English therefore students are able to work with buddies who speak L1, teacher also offers directions in L1 if possible. Students have word to word dictionaries as well as glossaries for content area vocabulary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services are aligned with student grade levels. Vocabulary and content area material is aligned with CCLS for the student's grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are programmed into a Newcomer Pullout class. This class allows new ELL students to receive instruction in an ungraded class designed for the purpose of transitioning students into the new school environment. Language acquisition is a priority in this class as well as content area vocabulary in math and science. Students are "graduated" from this class into a self-contained ELL class or Bilingual class when certain benchmarks are achieved. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? To ensure that our ELL population has an adequate opportunity to acquire a second language the following targeted interventions are being implemented; participation of ELLs in the RTI Program using Passport/Voyager, Ticket to Read, Go Math, Fundations (grades K-2) and TCRWP. ELLs participate in the Saturday Academy and use technology to support their learning. They are provided with differentiated instruction in small groups and flexible grouping. RTI provides At-Risk ELL students additional practice to support their language needs. Support ranges depending on student need, two or more periods per week. Ongoing professional development occurs during grade conferences, faculty conferences and off campus workshops. Emphasis on language development, non-fiction literacy, guided reading, fluency and academic vocabulary is the focus of P/D for ELL teachers. Bilingual teachers, ELL self contained teachers and General Ed teachers are invited to attend the many P/D opportunities offered during the school year, September 2018 through June 2019 and even in the summer. Ongoing professional development during grade conferences and faculty conferences focus on our large ELL population. Best practices to aid our ELL population are shared by all teachers. ELL faculty also attend Network and citywide workshops on ELLs and outside of the city workshops by BERG. All teachers attend Monday afternoon PD days, which include an array of offerings for teachers of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All ELL and TBE teachers in our school participate in the many P/D opportunities. These teachers then turnkey the information and materials from the P/D to ELL and TBE teachers in our school. Additionally, all Common Core Professional Development and Danielson Framework for Teaching is attended by ELL faculty which supports their clear understanding and use of best practices in the classroom focusing on the alignment of Citywide Instructional Expectations, Instructional Shifts and CCLS. Support is provided to Grade 5 teachers of ELLs on completing Middle School applications, CCLS for Middle School, programs available to ELLS in middle school and moving students from grade school to middle school guidance services. The following are the scheduled ELL training sessions - September P/D Day, October Grade Conference, February Grade Conference, April Lunch and Learn and the June Grade Conference and June P/D Day equals 7.5 hours of training for ELL teachers. 2018-19 CEP 59  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The parent and community participates in the education of our ELL student population. Parents meet during parent workshops to learn about strategies that are used to teach their ELL children. Parents are taught to use these strategies with their own children at home and are given special homework help information by licensed ESL Teachers. Parent Program Choice meetings are held so parents are able to choose the placement service for their children (ESL or Bilingual Programs). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Workshops are provided on a variety of topics to foster paretal involvement weekly by teachers and the guidance team (Tuesday afternoons), bimontly (on Fridays by the parent coordiator), during PTA meetings monthly, and on 2 parent nights throughout the year . Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Science experiments are designed by biligual classes and are entered into the Citywide STEM fair. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Heather Benson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Fairview School School DBN: 24Q014 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Heather Benson Title Principal Janine Chatterton Assistant Principal Cristina Cruz Parent Coordinator Loretta Fabricant ENL/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Espinoza Parent Claudine Webb Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Theresa Colleary Iris Leon Madelene Chan Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 06/29/2018 tbd 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q014 School Name: The Fairview School Superintendent: M. Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Janine Chatterton AP ELLs no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school will use Home Language Survey forms to assess our written translation and oral translation needs regarding language. Also data gathered during PTA meetings and parent workshops will also assist us in obtaining the information needed so that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 63  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The findings are as follows: The dominant language needs of this school for written and oral translation in Spanish and Chinese. In house capacity has been created for translations in French, Chinese, Punjabi, Arabic, Spanish, Italian and Greek if it became necessary. These findings were reported through faculty conferences, PTA meetings and SLT meetings TBD Sept 2018 TBD Sept 2018 TBD Sept 2018 TBD Sept 2018 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Documents we disseminate include: Monthly Newsletter Monthly Calendar of Events Notices about school closings and half days Notification of PTA meetings, parent workshops, parent engagement events Notification of communtiy opportunities Families monthly, or more often Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our new website PS14inCorona.org went live in September 2015 and will include a feature to translate all text on the web site into any language. All families, including extended family 2018-19 CEP 64  Currciula overviews grade by grade How to access data on line via instructional web site on your individual child Policy and Procedure Notices members and caretakers will be able to access all content on the web site in all languages. The new phone system has all menus listed in English, Spanish, and Chinese. Although the letters that we write and send home are to be translated in Spanish and Chinese only, the memos are posted on the web site and include instructions to paste and translate the text from these memos into Google Translate so that parents are able to understand all communication from the school. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Face-to-face meetings include: Parent Curriculum Nights Parent /Teacher Conference Nights plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The school can provide oral intepretation in multiple languages monthly or more often 2018-19 CEP 65  PTA metings monthly Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement Workshops Tuesday parent engagement one-on-one meetings including Spanish, Chinese, French and some Indian languages. Additionally, the school uses the DOE translation services to provide oral interpretation of information when needed. *using the call in interpretation office * hiring aides to translate at meetings * requesting translators when necessary from the translation unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use Blackboard connect, which translates the robocall based on the preferred language identified by the parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On the first day of school, the regs are distributed and discussed with all staff, who sign that they received it. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school uses in house services between school personnel and the DOE translation services to provide all parents with notifications in languages they need. All posters regarding translation services available from DOE are posted at the security desk and in the main office of the school. Faculty are made aware of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are included in all aspects of decision making in our school. Feedback is gathered at PTA meetings, SLT meetings, via Surveys at PTA meetings where data is collected, and via Surveys distributed whole school and collected and tallied by the PTA and front office staff. 2018-19 CEP 67 
