2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q015 School Name: P.S. 015 JACKIE ROBINSON Principal: ANTHONY PIGNATARO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Jackie Robinson School 29Q015 342900010015 Pre-K through Fifth School Number (DBN): 121-15 Lucas Street; Springfield Gardens NY 11413 718-525-1670 Phone Number: 718-723-7613 Fax: Anthony Pignataro apignat@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Anthony Pignataro Natalie Kelly Christine Ruiz Susan Chapman Ayodele Alabi na na District Information Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191st Street, Hollis, NY 11423 BMitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 217-7740 x222 (718) 217-7739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South FSC MarleneWilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  82-01RockawayBoulevard; South Ozone, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Renee Holstein Natalee Kelly Christine Ruiz Ursula Ragnooth Ayodele Alabi N/A Susan Chapman Traci Spencer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Crystal Clay Iyana Wilmott Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview VISION The Jackie Robinson School is committed to producing 21st century students who will become life-long learners. Through collaboration we will create an environment that builds strong relationships among students, staff, and families. Our school strives for the inclusion of diverse learning styles in student-centered classrooms that promote 2018-19 CEP 9 academic growth and excellence. MISSION To provide all students with academic, social-emotional, and technological skills to be successful in life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 15Q, The Jackie Robinson School, is a small and cozy elementary school with 438 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises of 88.81% Black, 7.53% Hispanic, .46% Asian and .68% White students. The .46% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, .68% Multi-racial. Student body includes 3.88% English Language Learners and 11% Instructional support students. Boys account for 48.86% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51.14%. The average attendance rate for the year 2017-2018 was 93.1%. PS 15Q provides children with opportunities to expand their thinking through a curriculum that brings all subject areas together. In this way, children make connections between different aspects of the world and see how they are relevant to their lives. PS 15Q believes that people learn by having conversations with each other, therefore our students engage in meaningful dialogue with classmates and staff while exploring academic and social concepts. We also believe that all children arrive with different levels of understanding of the world around them hence our goal is to help each child deepen that understanding. Based on a variety of data sources, the instructional focuses are as follows: To build 21st century learners through quality interactions Increasing parent involvement through on going two-way communication. While managing the academic curriculum we foster a true learning and working environment. Our school is a special place where parents, teachers, nutritionists, school safety, building managers (school aides), paraprofessionals, custodial staff, health aides and the administration come together to provide quality education and a better social environment for children – overall a better life for children. We have managed to move the thinking and the motivation of, almost, the entire school community to a height where all stakeholders are focused on greater achievement in students’ outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 10  We have recognized that we must continue to drive our students to mastery in all areas of learning. The entire school community is extremely motivated to work towards improving the school culture and academic rigor for the school year 2018-2019. The following list represents some of the many strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented across the school:  Watch Dogs- A program which incorporates positive male role models for the students, demonstrating by  their presence that education is important. Literacy Night- A special event for parents, teachers and students which, provides some helpful guidelines on how to write, read, and share their ideas.  Math Workshop for State Exams- This workshop allowed parents the opportunity to learn about the state exam, how students would be scored, common trends and how to help their students prepare for it at home. An aura of professionalism and determination between the administration and faculty permeate our school. The teachers and staff members feel they can turn to colleagues and/or an administrator for support, advice, and encouragement. The talent and arts component brings a new level of expectations for all stakeholders, especially the children. Their ability to travel to their talent area alone without incident elevates their self-esteem and boosts confidence. We provide a united learning environment enabling our students to develop strong leadership skills. The future is now; we are committed to better educate all children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Although our ELL population is small (3.88%), our special needs population remains a significant percentage (15.53%). In most Teachers provide sufficient supports in the form of charts or sentence starters to meet students at their entry points. As a result, all students are able to fully engage in the learning taking place and produce as meaningful work products. When presented with challenging tasks, students are asked to explain how they arrived at their responses. Students work collaboratively in strategically organized groups and partnerships and are able to critique one another and support their claims with evidence.Teachers are providing students with differentiated instruction and multiple entry points to meet individual needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the 2017-18 Framework for Great Schools report, the overall the most progress was been made in the area of Collaborative Teachers (+1.02%) along with a 2.04% increase based on the survey questions alone. Additionally, Rigorous Instruction increased 1.50%. Our key areas of focus will be on: Rigorous Instruction: need to increase the percentage of students scoring at proficiency (Levels 3 & 4) on both the English Language Arts and Mathematics exams Supportive Environment: need to increase the percentage of students with 90% or better attendance Collaborative Teachers: need to improve the professional learning opportunities and incorporate ongoing cycles of learning that are targeted based on data 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q015 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 433 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 19 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 68.4% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 6.0% 0.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.97 0% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 85% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 3 3 18 92.3% 4.8% 11.5% 90.5% 1.6% 1.2% 2 14% 8.4 31.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school's strength: Math instruction based upon:  Classroom Observations  Benchmark Data: Proficiency- School vs. District % Grade 3: 0%- 1.5% (-1.5%) Grade 4: 12.8%- 6.9% (+5.9) Grade 5: 7.6%- 3.1% (+4.5)  NYC Instructional Report: 2018 School vs. City  NYC School Survey 2. The need in this area is to improve the ELA instruction based upon:  Classroom Observations  NYC Instructional Report  Benchmark Data- School vs. District % Grade 3: 3.3%- 11.4% (-8.1) Grade 4: 5.1%- 14.6% (-9.5) Grade 5: 3%- 6.2% (-3.2)  NYC School Survey Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019 there will be a 5% increase of student ELA scores as measured by assessments in SchoolNet. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All teachers will continue to receive on-going teacher professional development cycles in specific pedagogical practices designed to improve conceptual understanding in ELA instruction. The following Professional Developments and coaching systems will be offered: Journeys PD: Provide overview and analysis of ELA Curriculum Model Teacher: Inter-visitations and 1 on 1 coaching K-2 Literacy Coach: Provide teachers in grades k-2 with strategies and best practices for student ELA growth. ESL teacher will receive specific professional development in embedding Universal Design for Learning strategies specifically with Imagine Learning. Special education teachers will receive specific professional development in embedding Universal Design for Learning strategies. Special Education Teachers  Administration  Instructional Cabinet  Model Teacher  Universal Literacy Coach  Administration  Queens South FSC  Administration  Queens South  FSC IEP/SETSS teacher All Teachers September 2018 - December 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 April 2019 - June 2019 ESL Teacher September 2018 - December 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 April 2019 - June 2019 September 2018 - December 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 April 2019 - June 2019 School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of the action plan by conducting classroom observations during ELA instruction, sitting in on teacher team meetings where ELA work is being All Teachers September Administration 2018 - 2018-19 CEP 16 analyzed and periodically collecting samples of student work to determine if improvements are evident. December 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 April 2019 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend on-going parent workshops - specifically in ELA - from October 2018-June 2019 from the administration, classroom teachers, and FSC support staff. Curriculum nights for parents will be scheduled so that they can learn about our instructional program that are grade specific, will be held in October/November 2018 and January/February 2019 for all parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Laptops/Ipads to use in their classrooms. Library Books I-ready Imagine Learning (ENL) Imagine Learning Math Facts (Math Fluency All Students) Per session Professional Development Educational Consultant Per diem hours to cover substitute teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 5% increase of student ELA scores as measure by assessments in SchoolNet. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Assessments in SchoolNet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: 1. Parent communication with students who arrive late to school. The Attendance team, Guidance councelor, Pupil accounting secretary, Parent coordinator and teachers all communicate with parents regarding lateness. 2. Weekly attendance meetings. 3. Policies and Practices: Weekly attendance meetings, parent communication system- Sonar Cloud, On-going attendance celebrations for parents and students. After a review of the attendance data by grade and by month the following was noted: In the 2017-2018 school year 18.8% of students are chronic absentees. Area of Focus: Improve student overall student attendance by decreasing the number of chronic absent students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in chronic absenteeism as measured by attendance reports from ATS. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The attendance team will give high priority to supporting the improvement of attendance and reduction of persistent absence by regularly reviewing data and reports All Students and Families Mid-September-December 2018 Administration Guidance Counselor Attendance Teacher January - March 2019 School Aides March -June 2019 Early Intervention for students when lateness and absences are excessive Chronically Absent Students October -December 2018 January - March 2019 March -June 2019 Daily: Students receive an attendance star for attending school; Daily Shout-outs for attendance by class Monthly attendance celebrations Chronically Absent Students September -December 2018 Administration Guidance Counselor Classroom Teachers School Aides Attendance Incentives: Administration Guidance Counselor January - March 2019 Classroom Teachers All Students School Aides District attendance teacher will assist in the monitoring of attendance data and ensure that appropriate supports are in place; home visits will be made to chronically absent students Chronically Absent Students March -June 2019 Mid September -December 2018 Administration Guidance Counselor Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  Daily notifications of student absents and lateness will be sent home using Sonar Cloud, parent letters, and by certified mail. Parent engagement and communications: the importance of regular attendance will be messaged through teacher created Newsletter as well was monthly parent newsletters, interactions with parents, monthly PTA meetings, and school-wide attendance incentives Chronically Absent Students January - March 2019 School Aides District Attendance Teacher Administration Attendance team Guidance Counselor March -June 2019 Mid September -December 2018 January - March 2019 March -June 2019 All families Administration Guidance Counselor Attendance Teacher Parent Coordinator IEP Teacher October -December 2018 January - March 2019 March -June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School leaders and guidance counselor will provide presentation to parents attending PTA meetings. The presentation will summarize the risk factors associated with chronic absenteeism, note the resources available at the school to improve student attendance, and describe the risks associated with attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for attendance team work and professional learning outside the school day Parent communication- Sonar Cloud 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in chronic absenteeism as measured by attendance reports from ATS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: Teachers requesting PD opportunities for component 4E based on Teacher Professional Development Survey. 2. Needs: Professional development centered around 3C - Engaging Students in Learning, based upon: Teacher observations Teacher Survey Conversations with Teachers Feedback from PPO Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to strengthen our culture of collaboration, 100% of teachers will be provided time to participate in Professional Learning Communities in order to improve pedagogical practice in English Language Arts so that by June 2019, a minimum of 45% of all students are on grade level in the area of Reading as measured by i-Ready data. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher training in the use of iReady, guided reading and Fundations All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Partner with neighboring schools that are using the same curricular programs in order to design inter-school visits to share best practices; teams of teachers will share new learning with colleagues. All Teachers November 2018- June 2019 Teachers will be offered the opportunity to attend professional learning cycles from the Queens South Field Support Center. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Monday professional learning cycles will be organized to reflect the specific needs of teachers and teacher survey. PD will be led by colleagues. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will try out newly learned strategies from PD/Model Teacher in order to share best practices with grade level colleagues and adjust based on feedback and the needs of students. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Data led Professional development by ESL,SWD teacher to share data from Imagine Learning and review best practice to support ESL student growth ESL Teacher September 2018-June 2019 School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of the collaborations through the use of classroom observations, teacher team meetings and by teacher-led professional learning sessions; feedback will be provided to strengthen practices. All Teachers  Administration  Universal literacy coach  model teacher  Service providers  Administration  Administration  QSFSC  Administration  Teachers  QSFSC  Model Teacher  Universal Literacy Coach  Administration  Teachers  Administration  ESL Teacher  Teachers  Para-Professionals  Administration  Teachers 2018-19 CEP 24  September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/families will be invited to attend special presentations from teacher teams in order to observe the manner in which teachers collaboratively go about making decisions for their students and to model the use of data used to make those decisions. Parents will have the opportunity to interact with the teacher teams and ask questions regarding the process. Monthly Family engagement workshops for parents. Literacy Night. Math Parent Workshops. Watchdogs - program involving dads collaborating with the staff and students. Family Dances Movie Night Painting Night Bingo Night Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session allowance for professional development offered during non-school attendance time. Data specialist team and Grade Leader Inquiry Teams will receive compensation for per session (collect and analyze data 2018-19 CEP 25  Substitute allocation due to scheduling adjustments when teachers attend workshops and outside visitations to other school to improve their teaching and learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minumum of 25% of all students are on grade level in the area of Reading as measured by i-Ready data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA iReady Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: We are continuing to support teachers with their planning through professional learning. Based on 2017-2018 End of Year Advance data , the average rating score for teachers in component 1E Designing Coherent Instruction, was 2.38. The focus for 2018-2019 will be to enhance their planning and preparation so that unit and lesson plans reflect the needs of students and the instructional focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase .2 points in Danielson Framework 1E (Designing Coherent Curriculum) as measured in MOTP advance reports. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage the faculty in activities and discussions related to the school’s mission, vision, and core values. Activities will include but are not limited to: Inquiry teams collaborative analysis and growth plan, data team analysis of common trends and next steps. Creating a Professional Development Learning cycle based upon teacher input. The inclusion professional development in classroom instruction will be monitored by periodic data analysis and observations. Grade Lead Teachers May2018-August 2018 Administration Grade Teacher Leaders All school staff June 2018-19 Administration Provide ongoing professional development for Introduction of new program Sandford Harmony to continue to support the SEL growth of students. This will be monitored through learning walks and discussions with the students and guidance counselor. All Teachers All Students May 2018-June 2019 All Teachers/Para-professionals Administration Guidance Counselor All Teachers Administration Incorporate weekly team builders to support SEL growth for students to build strong relationships within school community. IEP teacher provide Professional Development with data from Max Scholar to continue to support teachers with planning specific lessons regarding students with special needs ESL teacher will provide Professional Development with data from Imagine Learning to continue to support teachers with planning specific lessons regarding ELL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers/students September2018-June 2019 SWD teachers September2018-June 2019 Administration Special Education Students ESL Teacher ELL Students September2018-June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/families will be invited to attend special presentations from teacher teams in order to observe the manner in which teachers collaboratively go about making decisions for their students and to model the use of data used to 2018-19 CEP 28  make those decisions. Parents will have the opportunity to interact with the teacher teams and ask questions regarding the process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget Allignment:  Per Session allowance for professional development .  Per diem hours to cover substitute teachers Instructional Resources:  I- Ready and Imagine Learning for students which can be used at home as well as in school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will increase .1 points in Danielson Framework 1E as measured in MOTP advance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created survey using questions that mirror the Effective School Leadership questions on the NYC School Survey as well as MOTP Advance Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. PS 15Q strengths is our ability to support and engage our parents and families on what is happening in our school community. This is evidenced by the data from the NYC School Survey.  95% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school.  91% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. 2. A priority need in the upcoming school year will be to provide parents with more opportunities to volunteer their time to the school. This need is supported by the NYC school survey. Never- 17% Rarely- 14% Sometimes- 35% Often- 35% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase of parent communication through the use of the web-based platforms as measured by user reports from Sonar Cloud and Class Dojo. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide professional development informing parents for using Sonar Cloud and Class Dojo Families September 2018 ● Administration Increase the number of parents/families in the development of school-wide events, by providing parents with interest and need based surveys. Families September 2018-June 2019 Remind parents/families of important reminders and dates via Sonar Cloud, Class Dojo and Weekly/Monthly Newsletters and Calendars. Families Sept 2018-June 2019 ● PTA Members ● Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of the use of Sonar Cloud through surveys, discussions, and increase of parent involvement. Parents Sept 2018 ● Administration June 2019 ● Parent Coordinator Teachers Teachers will engage parents and families in monthly curriuculm events designed to keep them better informed regarding what their children are learning Parents Last Tuesday of every month 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 31  Resources: Sonar Cloud and Class Dojo Per session: Class Dojo training for new users Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase of parent communication through the use of the web-based platforms as measured by user reports from Sonar Cloud and Class Dojo. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sonar Cloud data and usage. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Non-Proficient students based on benchmark assessments When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Push-in/ Pull out support RTI SETTS Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole Group Small group Centers Guided Reading Push-in/Pull out Guided Reading Imagine Learning Max Scholars Mathematics Non- Proficient Students based on benchmark assessments Push-in/ Pull out support RTI SETTS Small Group Duringthe school day Push- In Programs Pull-out Programs Imagine Learning Max Scholars 2018-19 CEP 33 Non Proficientbased on data Track non-proficentstudents based on assessments data. Staff/parent referral . Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Instruction on grade level conceptual expectations. Instruction on grade level conceptual expectations. Whole Class; small group During the school day Small group instruction and one to one During the school day Guidance Support Small group instruction During the school day one to one 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are a total of 35 students identified in our school in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Looking at the whole child, we begin first with supporting families with school uniforms, coats, sweaters, shoes, boots, sneakers, undergarments (underwear, tee shirts, socks), gym shorts, belts, gloves and or hats. Also, we supply backpacks, notebooks and other school supplies, snacks, and donate food for the home when needed. For school services, the following is offered to the child: free breakfast and lunch programs; special school assemblies, supply costumes and attire for special events; school trips which include Broadway shows with dinners at restaurants, Washington DC and Albany; Senior Dues; free after school program; summer program; Saturday Sports Program; transportation costs – bus fare; SETSS; Counseling and support for both child and families; instrumental music program; theatre and film making classes; Talent (Art and Dance) and Sports Programs special extravagant evening performances for parents and family members showcasing our students’ talents; evening programs for families (My Princess and Me; Movie Night; Parent’s Painting Class; musical performances for parents); choir upper grades; track team; basketball team swimming lessons for Grade 2 student; tennis lessons for Grade 2 students; A Saturday and Holiday Advantage and Target 4Xcellence School for all upper grade students; After school test sophistication – ELA and Math; Virtues of the Month-for Character Education; College and Career Awareness Program; Readers to Leaders; The Reggie Project; Girls and Boys Programs; STEM Program; Vision O; Fathers’ Program; Safety Program; Family Engagement; ELA and math workshops; Student Government Enrichment Program (visits to City Hall, Brooklyn District Court) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The New York State Teacher Effectiveness Program is implemented to support teachers and administrators with supervision and instructional practice. Characteristics evident in a Highly Qualified Teacher include demonstrating organizational skills, enthusiasm (energy), an apparent love of children and teaching. A HQT has the ability to use wit and humor and is perceived by students as fair and approachable. A HQT displays self-confidence in front of a class: the teacher has control of the classroom and the students know who is in charge. A HQT is always prepared with the subject material and is always searching for and using, new methods to teach an old concept. Lessons are prepared, executed strongly, and can easily be adapted to fit the tone, environment, or mood of the class. The Highly Qualified Teacher takes pride in her work and always strives for excellence. In order to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified, the teacher must execute several key areas of mastery, planning, and preparation. ● Teacher shows excellent communication skills ● Promotes a safe and organized environment conducive to learning ● Sets an example of good rapport for peers and students as well as parents ● Has an accurate knowledge of the various disciplines ● Can build a healthy teacher/school relationship (collaboration) ● Recognizes and executes good pedagogue ● Able to plan effective lessons to move instruction ● Sets high standards for our learning community ● Able to give meaningful assessments based on data 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Can manage a variety of different students ● Supports the needs of all students, faculty, and parents, as well as the community ● Checks and returns work in a timely fashion to children ● Enhance students’ self esteem ● Incorporate critical thinking skills ● Include technology to move instruction ● Focus on student’s motivation ● Teacher Effectiveness Workshops will be available for all administrators and teachers. ● Give students insight into careers. ● Attend workshops, professional growth and implements those strategies to help fellow staff members and students. The Special Education Reform Act of 2012 constitutes that all students with IEP's who receive services such as Occupational Therapy and Physical Therapy, Speech or Counseling, Small Class, must be serviced in the school in which they are zoned. In some cases, when the school does not have the Special class or service in which the student should be placed, the school is mandated to provide that student with that service by any means necessary. Consequently, the Highly Qualified Teacher is a General Education Teacher who realizes what must be done and has the ability to incorporate the Special Education students' goals into her lessons. The teacher must be able to differentiate instruction to meet the needs of the Special Education student and provide that student with an equal opportunity learning opportunity. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The strategies and activities for high quality professional development for all teachers, specialists, and professional staff members are provided monthly after school during faculty conferences in addition to during after school hours. The activities include but are not limited to: data driven instruction, project based learning, inclusion of the Next General Standards, etc. All staff members also are provided on-going lunch and learn professional development during the school year so that teachers can learn and collaborate in small group settings. During the summer and throughout the school year, the administrative staff attends high quality professional development provided by the CSA organization in addition to on-going professional development at school sites and webinars. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-K program provides a nurturing, stimulating, learning environment where young children can thrive. Our commitment is to help children achieve their full potential so that all students will smoothly transition to kindergarten. With the help of the administration, coaches, specialists, parent coordinator, social worker, and guidance counselor, we are meeting the individual needs of all our students in working on building on students’ strengths. Based on the developmental level of each student, differentiation of instruction is implemented within the classroom through centers, small group instruction, and class lessons. The Pre-K teacher and paraprofessional collaborates and works closely with all the kindergarten teachers in planning and implementing horizontal and vertical alignment of all common core e learning standards. Pre-K and Kindergarten Teachers have the opportunity to collaborate 2-3 times during weekly to common plan and discuss how they are implementing the curriculum into their classrooms. Portfolios and on-going student assessments are frequently discussed and reflected on so that academic and proper intervention student needs are addressed. All Pre-K students eat lunch, have daily outdoor recreational times, and participate together in quarterly show presentations, holiday events, trips, classroom inter-visitations and interactions in order to for Pre School children to become acclimated in PS15 School . 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and teacher teams differentiate their assessments based on their class and the different leveled learners in the classroom. Teachers use the most current quantitative and qualitative data regarding student performance trends and additional indicators listed below to properly assess the students. ELA: Teachers use a variety of ELA testing materials to assess their students such as Baseline assessments, Journeys/Ready Gen Performance Tasks, ReadWorks and textual analysis passages, Storytown assessments, teacher constructed ELA biweekly and unit tests based on skills and/or strategies taught, in addition to Think Central and Engage NY resources available on line. On-Going comprehension and skill assessment conducted using Amplify 2018-19 CEP 39  assessments 3x a year in addition to progress monitoring. For ELLs we use NYSITELL as the entrance exam and the NYSESLAT as the spring assessment. We also assess them with periodic assessments in the fall and in the spring. Math: Teachers collaborate using Go Math chapter tests, Unit tests, Performance Based Assessments, Critical Thinking Tasks, Teacher made quizzes, Think Central Website, Amplify Testing for beginning/middle/end of year testing and progress monitoring in addition to Base line testing. Professional Development : Based on teacher requests, teacher data, and teacher observations and feedback, PS15Q provides on-going professional development to all teachers and specialists over the summer and throughout the school year. Professional Development sessions are held after school, on weekends, during faculty conferences, and grade conferences. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b, 5c,5d,5e 5a,5b, 5c,5d,5e na na 5a,5b, 5c,5d,5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 197,915.00 80,959.00 0 0 2,249,630.00 x x na na x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS15Q The Jackie Robinson School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS15Q The Jackie Robinson School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 15Q School Parental Involvement Policy At P.S. 15Q, we believe that ongoing involvement of parents is very important to the success of our students’ education. Our school creates and supports a strong parent-school partnership. We encourage parent volunteerism and plan meaningful activities in which parents and families may participate. P.S. 15Q is working with our BFSC, an organization that is committed to developing and maintaining strong programs of school, family and community partnerships. P.S.15Q will focus its programs and activities on six types of involvement: parenting, communicating, volunteering, learning at home, decision making and collaborating with the community. Through active pursuit of these six areas, P.S. 15Q will strive to create the best possible learning environment for its students. In reference to our BFSC uses research-based approaches to organize and sustain excellent programs of family and community 2018-19 CEP 42  involvement that will increase student success in school. To create and support strong parent-school partnership, this policy will be revised annually. Parent Orientation Open House Meeting is held annually at the beginning of each year. Two meetings are generally held - one for the lower grades (PreK-2) and the other for the upper grades (3-5). All parents are invited and encouraged to attend to be reintroduced to the school’s vision and expectation. The purpose of the parent orientation open house meeting is to provide parents an opportunity to meet and greet the teachers, paraprofessionals, and additional support staff who will be working with the children. The parents will also sit with their child’s teacher to understand the curriculum and social development for the entire school year. The teacher provides sample school books, the curriculum used in the school, the forms of assessment used to measure student progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school PA/PTA is another way that parents get involved. Meetings are hosted once a month where parents convene to talk about their issues, concerns and recommendations, school progress, school activities, community activities, changes that affect parents regarding school legislations and plan activities for parents and children to socialize. We also have recognition of student achievements, parent conferences, Title 1 meetings and workshops. Additionally, we provide childcare, food, workshops, conferences and transportation which will be offered as needed to the extent feasible and possible, in order to eliminate potential barriers to parent involvement. P.S. 15Q will engage parents with more community involvement via professional trainings offered to assist parents with the skills necessary to aid their children towards sustainability in the 21 st Century. Parents will attend community education council meetings on a monthly basis. Parent leaders will inform the school’s PTA regarding community information to keep an updated report on community events and collaborative efforts with supportive legislators. Another way P.S. 15Q will involve parents more during the 2017-2018 school year will be to provide additional supports to strengthen academic tutoring programs such as AIS and homework help. Parents will learn to help children on the home front with homework checks completed daily after school. Additionally, parents will learn under the auspices of the school administration and teachers’ support how to engage students more creatively with homework assistance. P.S. 15Q will also provide parents with timely and pertinent information regarding parent involvement, their child’s achievement and the school’s performance. This will include, but is not limited to, the following: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Yearly Title 1 and Curriculum Open House meeting  School performance records and proficiency level expectations distributed at the beginning of each school year  Written communication from teacher, including daily notes, weekly take-home folders, report cards and formal standardized test scores reports  Oral communication from teacher including o Phone contacts (goal: contacting 50% of population each grading period) o Parent Teacher Conference opportunities (at least two opportunities per year) o Interaction at after-school functions 2018-19 CEP 43  o Text Messages  PA/PTA meetings  School Council meetings  Parent Workshops  Newsletters  Monthly Calendars  Posting upcoming events on outside marquee, school website  Suggestions Survey distributed to all parents at the beginning of each year  Timely responses to parents suggestions through telephone calls, notes and conferences  Satisfaction Surveys distributed to all parents at the end of each year Parents, through the annual Open House meeting and the P.S. 15Q Handbook, will be assisted in understanding the following: the National Education Goals, the State of New York’s content standards and student performance standards, school improvement process (when applicable), the State of New York’s assessments, the School-wide program, and Title I requirements. Translations will be provided to the extent possible, funded by Title I. Ongoing Parents nights will provide opportunities for parents to participate in school related activities throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator will organize Parent Workshops, through which information will be distributed to parents on how to help improve their children’s achievement in school. The topics of these workshops will include, but not limited to, literacy, math, science, computer security, financial planning, energy savings, and parenting. Materials and information regarding child development and school achievement will also be made available to parents through monthly newsletters and through the Parent Coordinator. Additionally, Parent as Leaders Program (Learning Leaders) training seminars will be conducted at least once a year to train those individuals who desire to become active volunteers at the school. The Parent Coordinator will attend monthly faculty meetings and will inform faculty of parent concerns and/or activities when appropriate. The Parent Coordinator will also distribute information which stresses the value and utility of parental contributions and involvement in school personnel. When appropriate, the Parent Coordinator will work to build partnership with organizations, businesses and other schools in the community. These partnerships will be informed in order to improve the involvement of the community in the school, through volunteer work or the donation of gifts, and the involvement of the school in the community. The Parent Coordinator is an available resource to provide information and support to parents. Parents are made aware of the Parent Coordinator during the Annual Open House meeting and through the parent newsletter. The Parent Coordinator office is located on the second floor in the main office. The Parent Coordinator works in conjunction with the administration and faculty in providing parents with resources include information on child achievement in the areas of math and literacy, child development, best practices of child rearing, effective ways for parents to get involved in the school, and current volunteer opportunities for parents. To the extent possible, resources will be provided in English, French and Spanish. The school, parents, and coordinator will develop a Parent-Teacher-Student Compact jointly. This compact will outline how parents, the school staff, and students will share the responsibility for improved students’ academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build a partnership to help students achieve the state’s standards. 2018-19 CEP 44  The contract shall address the importance of communication between teachers and parents on an ongoing basis. The compact will be distributed to all parents and will be sent home with each student. Translations in other languages will be available as needed and the extent possible. The school will collect suggestions and comments from parents on an ongoing basis, through the beginning of the year parent interest surveys, ongoing parent workshop evaluations, and the end of the year Parent Satisfaction Survey. All data, comments and suggestions, including unsatisfactory comments, regarding the Title I school plan and parent involvement policy, shall be revised annually. This information will be considered in the revision of the Parent Involvement policy and Parent Involvement Action Plan for the school. The school will provide timely responses and suggestions . School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS15Q The Jackie Robinson School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities P.S. 15Q will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality learner-centered curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s academic achievement standardized tests . Hold parent-teacher conferences (at least twice for the school year) during which time the teacher will discuss the compact as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. The conferences are normally held in November and March of the school year (one in the afternoon and the other in the evening to accommodate all parents). Provide parents with frequent Progress reports four times throughout the school year on their children’s progress orally and written beginning the third week of September, November through December, March through April, and May through June. Fall Curriculum Day and Night in September as well as a Curriculum Night in the spring where parents learn about the curriculum and expectations for the upcoming grade. The school provides parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities. Parents wishing to volunteer should contact the Parent Coordinator for training as a Learning Leader. Parents wishing to observe classroom activities should coordinate a mutually agreeable time and date with the teacher. Parents are involved in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy and the school-parent compact . Parents are also involved in any School-wide Program that the children are participating in. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A and to explain Title I. The meeting is normally convened at a time convenient to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental 2018-19 CEP 45  involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible can attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs and will encourage them to attend. Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in Math, ELA, Social Studies and Science. This is normally on the Report Card that goes out in June. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I . Parent of students in Grades K-5 are provided with detailed reading explanations of results from Amplify three times during the year: November, March, and June. Parents of students in Grades K-2 are provided with detailed reading explanations of results from Amplify in math. Parents of all Pre-K students are provided with detailed results in all content areas from Amplify. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships IV. Teachers Responsibilities As a teacher, I will:  Show respect for each child and his/her family.  Provide an environment conducive to teaching and learning.  Help each child grow to his/her potential.  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction to assist students in learning the Common Core standards.  Utilize student data to motivate instructional lessons.  Enforce school and classroom rules fairly and consistently.  Maintain open lines of communication with the student and his/her families through parent teacher conferences at least annually. 2018-19 CEP 46   Seek ways to involve parents in the school program (volunteer, participate, observe).  Demonstrate professional behavior and a positive attitude.  Provide monthly notifications for classroom agendas.  Inform parents of any issues and progress in a timely manner.  Make sure students’ portfolios are accurate and up to date.  Develop students’ social skills so they can function in a public setting.  Minimize the achievement gap between the students.  Demonstrate leadership as a role model for the students.  Provide Common Core Workshops for parents You Tube Channel for supporting home-school contact, school events, calendars, as well as student experiences. Two TV Monitors located on each floor of the school building as well as 6 TV Monitors in the Café as we maintain support and contact with students, teachers, and parents. As a teacher, I will: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to me at a time and date convenient to both. Every Tuesday after school parents have the opportunity to meet with teachers from 2:30pm-3:05pm in addition to one 50 minute block each day during the week. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. The school will: Provide parents reasonable access to their child’s teacher and staff. Parents wishing to meet with their child’s teacher should contact the teacher to arrange for an agreeable date and time. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  See that my child attends school regularly and on time.  Prepare my child with the necessary tools to achieve excellence in class.  Provide a home environment that encourages my child to learn.  Make sure that homework is completed daily and reviewed.  Monitor the amount of television my child watches.  My child will watch educational programs that help promote education.  Communicate regularly with my child’s teachers.  Support the school in developing positive behaviors.  Talk with my child about his/her school activities.  Encourage my child to read at home and join the community library.  Volunteer my time at school (inside and outside the classroom).  Participate where appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education.  Promote positive use of my child’s extracurricular time.  Stay informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate.  Serve to the extent possible on policy advisory groups, safety meetings, SLT, PA/PTA, Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s Parental Improvement Team, the Title I Parent Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, or other school advisory or policy groups.  Provide additional resources helpful in supporting the school’s vision.  Bring your Father to School Day . III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  Always try to do my best in my work and in my behavior.  Get to school on time everyday 2018-19 CEP 48   Show respect for myself, my school, and other people.  Be prepared for all challenging educational opportunities.  Take pride in my school.  Uniform dress code.  Develop my critical and creative thinking skills.  Complete my homework assignments in a timely manner.  Study for all school assessments.  Monitor my television time.  Get to bed on time so that I get enough sleep for school the following day.  Work cooperatively with my classmates.  Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Give to my parent/guardian all notices and information received by me.  Strive to be an exceptional student  Always respect school property and keep it clean  Leave cell phones, game devices, music players, toys and any other items of value at home.  Keep your hands and your feet to yourself.  Follow the Student Discipline Code . 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name The Jackie Robinson School Borough Queens School Number 15 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Antonio K'Tori Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Avril Julian Teacher/Subject Area Iyana Wilmott, Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Lenon Murray Assistant Principal Renee Holstein Coach School Counselor Eileen Truzzolino Parent Parent Coordinator Verstine Thomas Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Eva Legrier - test coordinator C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 474 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Mclass to assess reading levels of our students. These assessments are done three times a year- Beginning, Middle, and End of the year. We also use periodic standardized testing. The data from these test drives our instruction. The results are on Aris and the information is shared with other teachers and parents. In additon, grade-level and class test are given to ascertain the areas where the students would need additional help. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 51  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Goals are aimed towards achieving the proficiently levels on the NYSESLAT. The students' success is measured by their performance on periodic tests administered across ELA, Math, and other subjects. If the students are not meeting goals, further intervention is given. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the data gathered and the progress monitoring, decisions are made about changes in goals, instruction, and services that the students will receive. All teachers working with the students will collaborate on the best plan to help these students achieve proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL determines which type of instructional program the studens will be placed in . All of our new students were qualified for the ENL services. They were identified as Beg and given the appropriate ENL units of study. Students are advancing on their proficiency. The NYSESLAT is showing annual improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Program is provided in English emphasizing English language acquisition to heterogeneous groups of mixed grades and proficiency levels. Native language support is also available whenever possible. b. TBE program. If applicable. Does not apply c. DL program. If applicable. Does not apply 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? If the students are beginners, the teacher pushes in or pulls out with the students and uses the time to teach English. The time is also used to introduce the grade and subject material to the students. Content area material is scaffolded for the students. When needed, material is also brought in their language to supplement instruction. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content material is delivered in English. Lessons are scaffolded for the students. We will provide bilingual glossaries. Extra vocabulary help will be given. We will work on scaffolding the common core for them. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Materials and tests are obtained and in the home languages and administered. If needed, screeneres will be called for testing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. does not apply at this time. b. These students are given extra time with ENL instruction and extra time to practice the oral language. Students are taught skills to help with reading and writing. Content area lessons will be scaffolded. They will be given extended time for testing. c. These students will be identified. They will be tested to see why they have not tested out. The areas of "need" will be identified and intense instruction will be given to help them. they will receive additional support in the content areas. d. Does not apply at this time. the students will receive push-in and pullout services to ensure that they succeed with less ENL services. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Explicit instruction is used in comprehension strategies and text stuctures, building background knowledge, and helping ELLs connect with their prior knowledge. Diagrams (e.g, labeling the parts of a plant) or matching activities will be used. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Does not apply at this time. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers differentiated classroom instruction, AIS periods, After school help, and Saturday school in english. There is also time in the computer lab used to work with students and individualize extra help in reading and math. We use Think Central and Starfall in the computer lab. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The Saturday school program will be extended to additional students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All academic and extracurricular activities are offered to all students. We have sports, dance, music programs, open to all students. 2018-19 CEP 53  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have sufficent materials for all students. We have support texts at different levels to help our students. Books are leveled to reader proficiency. There are computers available to all students. Programs such as Starfall help our students. We also use PBS kids and math sites to improve students learning. Material in their home language will be provided. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL- glossaries from the DOE websites are downloaded for the appropriate subject. Dual language material will also be obtained as needed. If needed, the DOE will be contacted for translators. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since our school is Pre-K - 5, all materials are appropriate for this group. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have sufficent materials for all students. We have support texts at different levels to help our students. Books are leveled to reader proficiency. There are computers available to all students. Programs such as Starfall help our students. We also use PBS kids and math sites to improve students learning. Material in their home language will be provided. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a summer programs in our school. Parents are given a list of community activities that will help their child. We reach out to the DOE to get information for the parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Does not apply Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are 1-2 teachers. Teachers working with the ELL students take workshops offered by the DOE. These include programs that teach how to include the ENL lerners in the Common Core. One workshop was the QTEL. Others are on helping ELLs with Science and Math. Another is on preparing the students for the NYSESLAT. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 54  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor has offered workshops in working with ELLs. The School will set up workshops with teachers and parents on how to reach the ELL students and support their learning. The calendar is being revised at this time. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Meetings will be scheduled with the parents and the LPT (Language proficiency team), twice a year to make parents aware of goals that are set for their children. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are 1-4. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Antonio K'tori, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS015 School DBN: 29 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. K'Tori Title Principal Mrs. Holstein Assistant Principal Ms. Thomas Parent Coordinator Ms. Julian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ms. Wilmott/Sped. Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mrs. Trizollino School Counselor Mr. Murray Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Legreir Other Test Coordinator Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/2/15 10/2/15 10/2/15 10/2/15 10/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/2/15 1/1/01 10/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q015 School Name: The Jackie Robinson School Superintendent: Ms. Mitchell The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Avril Julian ESL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We look at the home language survey of each child and their families on enrollment. We have a very low ENL population. The staff is aware of the students' home language. They are responsible for providing frequent communication with families. Translators are available to communicate with the families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 58  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral A few families requested Spanish as preferred written language English English English English English English English 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Spanish Haitian Creole, French Arabic Bengali Urdu Punjabi English 2 ALL ALL ALL ALL ALL ALL ALL 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The home language survey is given to parents in their preferred language. The parent survey and choice is given in their home language as well. If a notification goes out to a parent notifying that there is an approaching assessment or parent teacher conference, the ENL teacher will send the letters in both English and the home language. Monthly Notification of events Monthly School Policy Monthly We translate using T&I Google Translate We translate using T&I Google Translate We translate using T&I Google Translate 2018-19 CEP 59  Permission Slips Monthly We translate using T&I Google Translate 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? This school has back to school night, parent orientation for grades K-5, parent and teacher meet and greet, fathers bring your child to school day, parent- teacher conferences, etc. There is also a PTA (parent teacher association) that holds meetings and activities, with parents and the school. Monthly Parent Engagement Events Teacher/staff will communicate through letters, class dojo and text messages in their home language Additional curriculum nights Monthly Parent Engagement Events Family nights Monthly Parent Engagement Events PTA Meetings/Events Monthly Teacher/staff will communicate through letters, class dojo and text messages in their home language Teacher/staff will communicate through letters, class dojo and text messages in their home language Teacher/staff will communicate through letters, class dojo and text messages in their home language 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Teacher/staff will communicate through, phone call (interpretation service T&I) letters, class dojo and text messages in their home language Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We inform the staff through Professional Development and letters to teachers and related staff in September with the interpretation number 2018-19 CEP 60  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Letters for parental notification in the needed language will be downloaded from the DOE site. A staff member will review the information with the parent. Class, Dojo and letters are used as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A possible survey will be given to the affected parents at the middle point of the school year requesting feedback of the quality of the translation services. 2018-19 CEP 61 
