2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q018 School Name: P.S. 018 WINCHESTER Principal: LAURIE ANN CAREDDU 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 18 Q The Winchester 342600010018 BEDS Code: School Number (DBN): 26Q018 Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 7184644273 Fax: Pre-K - 5 8635 235Court, Queens Village, NY 11427 7184644167 School Contact Person: Laurie Ann Careddu Email Address: lcareddu2@schools.nyc.go Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Laurie Ann Careddu Mark Amft Claudia Goodson Elaine Larkin Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Laurie Ann Careddu Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): non-title I none none Erin Jaquesand Esther Kim CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 26 Superintendent: Danielle Giunta Superintendent’s Office Address: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Email Address: DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-631-6943 Fax: 718- 631-6996 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens Plaza North Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax: 718-391-8320 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Laurie Ann Careddu Mark Amft Claudia Goodson N/A N/A N/A N/A Leigh DiScala Mariam Singh Amina Woods *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PerminderThiara Sherwyn James Andria Scala Kristina Sorrentino Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P. S. 18 Q is committed to academic excellence by creating highly creative, divergent thinkers through a rigorous and integrated educational experience aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. All members of the school community will acquire the skills necessary to be successful life-long learners, open to limitless possibilities and prepared for the challenges of a unique and diverse society. At our school, we believe that each student will thrive with a well-rounded education. Academics are stressed, as well as leadership skills, character education, mindfulness, 2018-19 CEP 9  and diversity. Through the appropriate instruction and enrichment of innate talents, students will meet high standards and reach their ultimate personal and academic potential. Respect and acceptance of each individual is at the heart of what we do. At our school, every child will excel. The staff at P.S. 18 promotes life-long learning skills by challenging students to be critical thinkers. The administration supports this mission by aligning resources, budget and professional development. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 18 Q is a Pre K-5 school, located in a working middle class community in Queens Village, New York. This school serves a population of approximately 570 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. A partnership with families fosters a positive relationship between our school and the home. PS 18 Q has vertical teams in each subject area and grade level teams in order to analyze student work and then brainstorm how to further improve instruction.The grade level teams engage in inquiry around a problem of practice. For the 2017-2018 school year, all grades focused on math, specifically multi-step problem solving. Grade level teams continued the work from the Math Vertical Team with revising math pacing calendars, lessons, and assessments. Math discourse was also a school-wide focus this year. Building on the work of the Literacy Vertical Team, teachers continued to administer benchmark reading assessments to plan targeted instruction for students not reading at grade level. During the year, the team met to further revise the benchmark assessments to ensure they were capturing accurate student performance data that could be used for planning and instruction. The Gifted and Talented team continued using several enrichment programs including chess, Toastmasters, Spanish, Worldly Wise, and Jacob's Ladder, to further enhance and enrich our program. They have also continued to incorporate more technology throughout the subject areas. We use Dropbox to allow all staff to share resources. We continued using our Twitter account for our school in order to further connect with the "digital world". We are currently reflecting on ways to enhance our use of social media to be more effective and reach more of our community. During the 2017-2018 school year, PS 18Q continued our work in embracing diversity and mindfulness. Our school-wide celebrations of Diwali, Lunar New Year, Winter Holidays, and Flag Day included more members of the community and showcased the diversity and talent in our school. Emotion Ocean, a social emotional program, continued and reached more students. The school community continued our daily school-wide meditation led by one of our teachers and several students each day. We continued to support our work around character building by incorporating the monthly theme into our Book of the Month and Student of the Month assemblies. We began to incorporate Sanford Harmony into our classrooms. For the upcoming 2018-2019 school year, teachers will be trained in the Yale RULER program for emotional intelligence. PS 18 Q is a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project School for balanced literacy instruction school-wide. The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project professional development model at PS 18 includes grade level meetings and grade level lab sites where specific strategies and pedagogy are modeled by the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Developer and then practiced by the classroom teachers. In addition, teachers attend the professional development offered by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project . Teachers continued to use Words Their Way Spelling/Phonics program to target our struggling learners. In addition our students in grades 1-3 use Daily Language Instruction to further meet the needs of early literacy development. For the 2018-2019 school year, teachers in grades K and 1 will implement a newly developed phonics program from Teachers College. Fundations is used with students who needed continued support. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  PS 18 Q currently offers a New York City Department of Education Gifted and Talented Program for third- fifth grade. This program is designed to support the needs of exceptional students. These students often need accelerated and more challenging curriculum. The Gifted and Talented program delivers rigorous and specialized instruction, aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. The school has six Integrated Co-Teaching Classes (ICT), and two 12:1:1 bridge classes (K/1/2 and 3/4/5). An Individual Education Program/Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) teacher works closely with the classroom special education teachers and service providers to ensure differentiation of the curriculum to meet the needs of individual learners. Our full–time and part-time English as a New Language teachers (ENL) work in the classroom with ENL Learners or pulls out a small group of students to work on language acquisition skills. The ENL teacher ensures that the ENL students have appropriate access to the curriculum dependent upon the level of the learner. Our part-time Response to Intervention (RTI) teacher works with identified students that need additional literacy support, as Related Service Providers work with mandated students. Our RTI teacher works in a small group or one to one with the RTI students and often differentiates to ensure comprehension of the skill or strategy being taught. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. For the 2017-2018 school year, math instruction was an area of focus. We decided to focus on improving student performance in mathematics through improving math discourse and creating consistent routines in our classrooms. We also worked on improving student discourse through games in the classroom. We continued to focus on work we started in the couple of years with number talks and added a new dimension of number strands to the routines. our Teachers attended several workshops and PD sessions throughout the year and shared their learning with their colleagues. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Guide, 97% of teachers say that students participate in class discussions. However, only 92% of teachers say that students build upon each others' ideas. We began a lot of work on math discourse this year and it will be a focus for the upcoming school year. Our Instructional Cabinet continued taking on more responsibilities including leading PD sessions, attending workshops and turn-keying information, and working on ways to further improve the school community. In addition to Cabinet members many of our classroom teachers took on leadership roles including presenting PD, leading charitable community events, and serving on various committees and inquiry teams. Based on our survey, 95% of teachers agree that they are able to design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' needs (i.e. ELLs and SWDs). This is an area we will continue to focus on to ensure teachers have resources, PD, and strategies to reach all learners and provide differentiated instruction to ensure the needs of all students are met. At PS 18 Q we also focused on Collaborative Teachers in order to build cohesiveness within and across grade levels. 100% of teachers feel that there is a sense of peer collaboration in lesson planning, coordinating teaching, and discussion around pedagogy. We will continue to make this is a focus for 2018-2019. Improving Strong Family-Community Ties was also a continued area of focus for the 2017-2018 school year. The school hosted events to bring in the community such as the Pumpkin Patch, Halloween Parade, Spring Fling, Chess Tournaments, Winter Concert, Weekly Parent Reading Buddies, and numerous parent and parent/child workshops. Parents were also invited into their child's classroom on a monthly basis to engage in a lesson or activity in a particular subject areas. In addition we had school wide cultural celebrations for Diwali, Lunar New Year, Winter Holidays and Flag Day. The feedback from parents was very positive. All parents were invited into the classrooms throughout the school year and this was implemented within our parent engagement. Each month, parents were invited in to observe a specific subject area and engage in their child's learning. However, according to the survey only 94% of parents strongly agreed that they were invited to observe instruction. We will work ot ensure that communication around parent engagement is worked on. in addition, only 91% of parents say they are very likely to attend a school event. This is an area of focus for next year. We will look for additional ways to involve parents in our community. 2018-19 CEP 11  We will continue to emphasize Supportive Environment for our PS 18 Q community. The book of the month, student of the month, and various activities for the month will focus around the theme. We took on a school musical to continue to support our students and give them more creative opportunities outside of academics in the classroom. For the 2018-2019 school year we intend to continue developing these areas and continuing to push the level of engagement of all constituents in our school community. We will continue to grow the work around diversity and mindfulness. In addition, we will also focus on Rigorous Instruction which is the core of our school's Instructional Focus. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q018 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 617 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 18 14 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 27 7 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 59.0% % Attendance Rate 47.8% % Reduced Lunch 13.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 14.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 48 50 27 95.8% 11.0% 11.7% 11.2% 66.8% 1.3% 2 2% 6.9 78.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June 2018, 66% of students in Grades K-5 were at or above grade level in math as measured by the enVision End of Year assessment. Based on 2018 State Math scores, 78% of students were at level 3 or 4 (SWDs were at 30% and ENLs were at 26%). We began the 2017-2018 school year by looking into different classroom routines that promoted students' critical thinking in math and their ability to construct arguments. We looked at pivot, notice and wonderings, closer to, and You Me. Teachers worked to implement these routines school wide. We discussed the importance of students learning through games. We looked at data from classrooms that were using math games and noticed the positive impact on student performance. Teachers modified lessons to include these games in meaningful ways, including ways to increase discourse during these games. Both pencil and paper games, and computer games were used. Teachers focused on targeted small group instruction providing students with multiple entry points in order to master multi-step problem solving. We continued to use Number Talks to further strengthen and build fluency. Inquiry for the year also focused on math problem solving. Students in each grade's cohort were identified early in the year based on specific assessments given to students. Teachers will continue to focus on providing specific strategy instruction to small groups of students. During the 2017-2018 school year we found success in engaging students in math, helping more students build confidence and an understanding of numbers and number sense. We will continue to build upon this work for 2018-2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students in K-5 , 30% of SWDs and 40% of ENLs will be performing at grade level (3 or 4) in mathematics as measured by enVision topic assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD sessions with administration will focus on specific strategies teachers can implement during small group instruction for students struggling in math. Students PD sessions with math cohort participants will focus on strategies and skills learned from cohort sessions that can be implemented by teachers in the classroom. Students, Teachers Classroom teachers in grades K-5 will administer enVision topic assessments after each topic. Topic assessments will be scored and reviewed with grade level colleagues. Data will be reviewed to determine key areas for additional support as well as areas of growth. Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Cohort participants Teachers, administration September 2018-June 2019 Data will be tracked across all grades and periodic PD based on findings Classroom teachers in grades K-5 will administer benchmark assessments after every 4 topics. Continuous use of math games during lessons and topics to reinforce discourse and number sense. Teachers Administration, Math lead teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration September 2018-2019 Teachers, data specialist, administration Students September 2018-2019 Students Teachers, administration Teachers, Administration 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers will follow pacing calendars for math topics and will revise as needed. Students AIS/RtI support will be given for students in need of additional support in specific areas of math. Students ELL teacher will incorporate strategies learned during math PD as well as targeted strategies for ELLs Students, teachers, ELL teachers Tuesday OPW time will be set aside for math strategy planning and inquiry focusing on math. Students and Parents Number Talks will continue to reinforce math fluency. Students Continous analysis of assessment data will be used to further plan and guide small group and whole class instruction. Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teachers, RTI teacher, Administration Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 ELL teachers, administration Administration, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will support families understanding of rigorous instruction and the Next Generation Learning Standards in order to support the students at home by planning workshops, monthly parent engagement activities, newsletters, and communication from teachers on an on-going basis. Each grade invites parents in once every month to keep them informed and up to date on instructional and classroom practices. These activities help parents better understand the expectations of the Common Core and the school by providing appropriate grade level activities and end of year expectations. The principal and assistant principal are responsible for the oversight of these practices. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. enVision program, math pacing calendars, topic assessments, benchmark assessments, Exemplar problems. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 16  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students and 20% of SWDs and 25% of ELLs will be performing at or above grade level in math as measured by topic assessments, benchmark assessments and performance tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) enVision topic assessments and benchmark assessments as well as performance tasks (i.e. Exemplars) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 18 has a culturally diverse population with students from many countries around the world (68% Asian, 10% Black, 13% Hispanic and 6% white). We also have significant ELL (12%) and special education (12%) populations. Many of our students are immigrants or first generation American citizens. It is important for us all to be aware of the diversity in the community and learn ways to celebrate this with one another. Students need guidance on how to be accepting of all members of the community and need ways to deal with bullying and standing up for one another. Based on the data from the School Survey, and parent feedback, we have established a supportive environment. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 100% of teachers responded positively in the area of safety and 96% responded positively in the area of social emotional support. Parents shared that the school works to create a sense of community (97%) and 96% of families say that the school promotes family and community involvement in the school. We will continue to build on this area by improving communication to families on how we continue to support our students in becoming well-rounded citizens ready for the demands of the 21st century. We will continue to work hard to build trusting relationships with families so that teachers, parents, and students all feel like valued partners in educating the children of PS 18Q. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of students will be self aware of their emotions and be able to self manage these emotions. This will be measured by a student survey with questions designed to measure specific areas of social emotional well being. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Outside speaker/presenter(s) to deliver assembly on character building, anti-bullying, etc. Students, Teachers Teachers and principal will turn-key the RULER curriculum and teachers will implement in classrooms. Students, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, principal, Parents May 2019 Survey created by equity team and administration. Students Teachers will implement the Respect for All curriculum and students will take part in classroom activities around this. Students, Teachers Lower grades will buddy with upper grades as reading buddies/mentors. Classes will work together once a week over the course of the year. This includes classes with heavy ELL populations, ICT classes, and self-contained classes. Students, teachers Students and staff will take part in various cultural celebrations in which the various cultures and diversities in the school community are shared and celebrated. Families will be invited as well. Students, teachers, parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Welcome bags given out to ENL students new to the country and translators provided as needed. Students will take part in various school wide charitable activities including St. Jude Mathathon, Holiday cards for Veterans, Ronald McDonald House, Operation Gratitude, etc. ' New ENL Students Students, teachers, administration September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 administration Teachers, administrations, guidance counselor Teachers Staff, administration, parent coordinator Student Council, Teachers, ENL Teachers Staff, administration, Student Council 2018-19 CEP 19  Each grade will organize a charitable event or project. Parent volunteers support activities by donating time to helping with these events Parents will be invited into each class on a monthly basis to engage in their child's learning. Each grade will pick a day/time/subject that will be open to parents. Important information, letters, etc. will be translated for families. When not available, oral translations will be provided. In addition to report cards, mid-year progress reports will be sent home to further support communication with parents regarding their child's progress Monthly character themes coordinated with student of the month and book of the month 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, teachers, administration, parents September 2018-June 2019 teachers, administration, parents Teachers, administration, parent coordinator, parents October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All staff,administration, grade teams All staff, parents All staff, parent coordinator, administration teachers, administration, parents Students, teachers, parents January 2019 Administration, teachers monthly administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly character theme and book of month letters sent to parents, assemblies around character, communication with parents regarding school-wide celebrations. Book of the month letters to parents include the title of the book 2018-19 CEP 20  used for the specific character trait, as well as specific activities parents can use at home. Parents are invited to the Student of the Month Assembly Program to celebrate student accomplishments. Book of the Month letters are written and sent home by the AP. The AP also oversees the character building program and plans each assembly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Outside speakers and/or companies, presenters, Respect for All curriculum, Materials for fundraisers (St. Jude Marathon, Ronald McDonald House, Alex's Lemonade Stand, etc.), Books of the Month with messages about character, respect, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of students will have taken part in at least five assemblies or learning activities around character building/respect. In addition, students will have participated in at least two charitable activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Calendar of events, Monthly Character Building School-Wide Activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year we continued our work with inquiry teams on each grade level. These teams focused on math, with a lens on multi-step problem solving. Teachers had professional development around inquiry and analyzing student work protocols. The work of teacher teams resulted in school-wide instructional coherence, improved pedagogy and has strengthened teacher instructional capacity. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 97% of teachers feel that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching and have had opportunities to work productively with colleagues. Moving into the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to develop our inquiry teams and further enhance the implementation of effective strategies learned though the inquiry process. One possible structure is to bring in more vertical inquiry teams so that we can ensure cohesiveness across the entire school. Teachers on each grade will have at least one common weekly prep to ensure adequate time during the day for collaboration as well as during Monday PD sessions and Tuesday OPW time. Each grade will again have a grade leader to ensure communication is consistent to all grade level teams. Teachers will again use inter-visitations as a way to learn additional strategies and bring best practices into their own classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated on at least one inquiry team and presented their findings in which student achievement improved as measured by inquiry specific data and student work. Each grade will focus on an area of need specific to the needs of the students. Assessment data will be collected and analyzed throughout the cycles. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD time on Mondays will focus on inquiry one to two Mondays per month Teachers September 2018-June 2019 teachers and administration Inquiry teams will meet to plan each phase of inquiry work and determine an area of focus. Inquiry will target specific subgroups including SWDs and ELLs. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration and Teachers Teachers will work on developing strategies to support their inquiry work Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, staff Teachers will develop, administer and analyze pre-assessments to determine student target population/cohort. This will include a lens for SWDs and ELLs in order to refine strategies specific to those learners. Teachers will present findings at Monday PD sessions and receive feedback from colleagues. Continuous cycles of targeted instruction for cohort of students. Inquiry teams will establish specific number of times, etc. Special Education Team will meet bi-monthly as a whole group to discuss pertinent and relevant issues. Teachers and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration Teachers and Students Teachers Special Education teachers, administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers, Administration Teachers, Administration Teachers and paras will work to share a tool, artifact, etc. that has proven successful in the classroom. Share fairs will be Teachers, paras, administration 2018-19 CEP 23 organized (by subject area) and implemented at points during the year. Teachers and paras November 2018-May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters from teachers, daily/weekly communication via email and Class Dojo, parents invited to classroom to engage in learning, parent meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduled PD time, Student Work protocol, common preps, grade leaders, teachers to lead PD sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in at least one cycle of inquiry work and presented findings at least once. Assessments used for monitoring of effective strategies will be analyzed and shared during grade level inquiry meetings as well as with all grades at Monday PD sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development Agendas, progress monitoring of teams by administration, calendar of team benchmarks, feedback to teams. Specific assessments will vary by grade depending on specific area of focus for inquiry. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The need for teachers to take on leadership roles at grade level and across subject areas is essential to facilitate the Professional Collaborative Learning Model and the Vision for Great Schools. Our instructional cabinet has done significant work around school policies, assessments, and professional development. Together we developed and revised homework and grading policies. Lead teachers, who are part of the school’s Instructional Cabinet, will continue to develop and revise school policy based on data and findings as well as best practice. Teachers will develop areas of interest to focus on for the 2018-2019 school year. We will continue to build on the work we did in the 2017-2018 school year in order to maximize teacher strengths, develop effective teachers and team leaders, a school-wide culture of shared and distributed leadership must be established. Cabinet members will take on additional roles in monitoring structures and systems in place. Teachers will lead Professional Development (PD) in their areas of expertise and/or interest. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 94% of teachers felt the quality of professional development was positive. 97% of teachers felt that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues on PD. We will look to involve more teachers in the planning and implementation of PD in order to better meet their needs and improve this area. Teachers develop and lead professional development in their areas of interest and/or expertise. Teachers will attend outside PD as determined by administration or requested by teachers themselves. Teachers will present their learning at Monday PD sessions and grade level meetings. Teachers will organize, lead and oversee various school community events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have planned, implemented or led a PD session or served on a vertical team as measured by an overall E or HE rating in component 4E on the Danielson Framework. This will be measured by evidence of preparing and leading a PD session, school event, new school initiative, etc. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and assistant principal will work with Instructional Cabinet to analyze student data across subject areas to get a better understanding of the school’s and students’ needs Pedagogical staff September 2018- June 2019 Administration PD committee will conduct a survey to determine professional development needs and wants of the staff. The survey will include areas for interest in teacher-led PD. Pedagogical Staff Sept 2018 Pedagogical Staff Teachers will attend professional development given by Teachers’ College. They will take the knowledge learned and lead PD sessions in-house to disseminate information and new strategies. Pedagogical Staff September 2018-June 2019 TC Staff Developers, Administration Teacher leaders in Special Education and ELLs will lead workshops and PD sessions on best practice for staff and parents. Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Administration will engage in conversations with parents regarding needs of the school (workshops, celebrations, concerns, etc.) These will be addressed on an on-going basis. Parents, Administration September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Teachers will have the opportunity to present inquiry or best practices (by grade level or other area) during Monday PD or on a Staff Development day September 2018-June 2019 Administration Administration Administration Teachers will have the opportunity to present area of expertise or interest to parents during parent workshops Teachers, Parents, Administration September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 18 engages and supports families' understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote leadership among parents and their engagement with their children at home. For example, we offer several school-wide celebrations, Family Fun Nights, PTA meetings, PT conferences, policies (homework, grading, snack, etc.) have been sent home. Personnel include administration, parent coordinator, and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Structures were built into the schedule to allow for common planning time, weekly cabinet meetings, and teacher team meetings. Instructional leaders were identified and time is set aside for collaboration with administration and other colleagues. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of teachers will have had the opportunity to engage in a leadership role as measured by logs/agendas of PD activities, Parent Workshops, Mentoring hours and Teacher Team Facilitators. Meetings with administration to understand the impact this work is having on teachers and student learning in order to provide additional supports to school staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Logs/agendas of PD activities, Parent Workshops, Danielson Framework 4E Growing and Developing Professionally Ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from parents, there is a desire and need for more workshops and events to bring the community together. All parents were invited into the classrooms throughout the school year and this was implemented within our parent engagement. Each month, parents were invited in to observe a specific subject area and engage in their child's learning. According to the School Quality Guide 97% of parents say they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child and 96% of families say that the school regularly communicates with them about how they can help their children learn. We will work ot ensure that communication around parent engagement is worked on to ensure that all parents feel that we communicate with them more effectively about how to best help their children. We will look for additional ways to involve parents in our community. This includes more celebrations of cultural diversity. Only 91% of families said they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school. We will continue to work closely with our parents to improve parent involvement and have more opportunities for parent volunteers. In addition we continue to look to plan more workshops around curriculum and how parents can better support their children at home. Parents have expressed a great desire to work more collaboratively with the school on behalf of their child’s education. With a large ELL population, parents who are not fluent in English, struggle to help their children at home, specifically in reading and writing. Therefore there is a need for more workshops and parent engagement on ways to support ELL families. We continue to work on ways to unite the community in other ways other than workshops. This includes Family Fun Nights (phys ed, art, science, etc.) and cultural celebrations. We will continue to build on the school-wide celebrations for Diwali, Lunar New Year, Flag Day, etc. by bringing more activities into each one. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a minimum of 10 school community events and a minimum of 8 parent workshops in which there will be 50% family participation in at least 4 of these events/workshops as measured by attendance logs, ticket counts, etc. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will be invited and encouraged to attend meetings/workshops and Parent Book Club Parents will receive notice of all school events via monthly calendars, phone messages, emails, and newsletters. Parents Parents School website will be kept up to date with events, workshops and meetings Parents Parents Parents will be invited to and attend monthly PTA meeting Parents Parent workshops will focus on ELL students/parents and SWDs. Workshops will provide strategies to better help students at home. ESL teacher, special education teachers Parent workshops focusing on bullying, behavioral strategies, etc. Parents Parents Parents and students will participate in school events and Family Nights (Phys Ed, Art, Science), Spring Fling Students Parents and Students will participate in concerts and performances Parents will attend parent/teacher conferences Parents Parents October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, teachers Parent Coordinator, Administration, teachers School Technology Teacher PTA, Administration, Parent Coordinator ESL teacher, special education teachers September 2018-June 2019 All teachers, guidance counselor, administration, parent coordinator Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 29  Parents and students will participate in school events including, but not limited to: parent reading buddies Student of the Month Assemblies Bring Your Dad to School Diwali Celebration Lunar New Year Flag Day Winter Holidays writing celebrations Field Day Carnival Ballroom Dancing American Ballet Theatre Spring Fling Mother's Day Tea International Night Curriculum Nights School Musical Zumba Nights Career Day PTA Minutes included on the back of each meeting announcement notice Parents and Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Parents, Teachers, Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator PTA board Teachers and Administration 2018-19 CEP 30 School Twitter Account Parents New school Facebook account Monthly classroom parent visitations by grade/subject level to observe and engage in classroom instruction October 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers Teachers and Administration September 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Dancing Classrooms, ABT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly calendars, email distribution list, flies for all events and workshops, attendance sheets, American Ballet Theatre, Dancing Classrooms, refreshments, food, building permits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have achieved 40% parent participation in at least two school events or workshop. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets, ticket sales and event responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Not meeting cut scores on NYS assessments, Classroom Assessments, Classwork, Teacher Observations, Below grade Reading Level, Writing Assessment Scores, Teacher’s College Word Assessments, Spelling/Phonics Inventories Not meeting cut scores on NYS assessments, Classwork, Teacher Observations, enVisions Topic/Benchmark Assessments, Problem solving scores Classroom Assessments by class teacher and science teacher, Classwork, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Wilson, Fundations, Fountas and Pinnell Phonics, Words Their Way Phonics Instruction, TC Reading and Writing Units of Study, Common Core ELA Clinic supplemental materials, Ready Series Books, Coach Book Series, National Geographic Ladders Series, close reading, shared reading I-Ready online program, myON enVisions remediation materials, Common Core Mathematics Clinic supplemental materials, Coach Book Series, mathematics websites such as IXL, Ready Series Books, I-Ready online program Harcourt Science program materials, non-fiction aligned resources(trade books, articles), computer software, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, one-to-one instruction, individualized online practice from I-Ready, focused mini-lessons When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Provided during the school day with classroom teachers, Additional RTI/AIS periods during the day, Small group instruction, one-to-one instruction, individualized online practice from I-Ready, focused mini-lessons Provided during the school day with classroom teachers, Additional RTI periods during the day, Small group instruction focused on understanding of content related vocabulary, science Provided during the school day 2018-19 CEP 32 content knowledge and critical thinking skills Small group instruction focused on understanding of content related vocabulary, social studies content knowledge and critical thinking skills Provided during the school day Sessions are in small groups or individual. Provided during the school day Social Studies Teacher Observations Classroom Assessments, Classwork, Teacher Observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Determination by PPT/RTI team, referrals by staff i.e. Brain Pop, Discovery Software, Britannica Online) Supplemental Social Studies Curriculum materials (trade books, articles, primary source documents), computer software, i.e. Brain Pop, Discovery Software, Britannica Online) At-risk services (provided by Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist) Strategies include promoting self-esteem, social and emotional problem solving, maintaining friendships, communicating feelings, acceptable behavior 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Non-Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Non-Title I Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34 School supplies, clothing, trips etc. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3462 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 0 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 18, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 18 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 18 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 41  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the lementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III after school program at PS 18 will focus on developing language skills through digital photography residencies and introduction to i movie workshops. The name of the vendor for these residencies is Magic Box Productions. The requested expenditure is exclusively for the Title III program. Through the New York State English As a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) data analysis we found that our students need to make gains in all four language modalities across the grades. In the intro to i movie residencies, English Language Learners (ELLs) in grades one through five will work collaboratively to create and edit an original video using Apple’s iMovie software. Thirty students will be involved in this residency. The subgroups represented are newcomers, students with disabilities and long term ELLs. Students will be exposed to traditional art materials and techniques while incorporating new media and technology in the process. This curriculum is designed to build literacy skills, creativity, technical skills, and interpersonal skills as students collaborate over time for a common goal. The language of instruction in the after school program will be English, with native language resources made available. A certified English As a Second Language teacher and a resident artist will facilitate all sessions. The ENL teacher will differentiate instruction by providing comprehensible input to students through specialized vocabulary, visuals, manipulatives as well as reading and writing activities. In addition to the work with the resident artist, two ENL teachers will provide an additional hour of direct instruction once a week for 10 sessions to students in listening, speaking, reading and writing using strategies and new guided reading books purchased with Title III money as an AM ENL program, held from 7:15-8:15 AM, starting in January 2019. There will be two classes which will be separated by grade. Explicit and interactive instruction will be provided in phonemic awareness, letter formation, phonics, vocabulary, fluency, comprehension and written composition. Magic Box Productions resident artist Alexis Raskin is an award-winning video artist whose work has been exhibited at such venues as MASS MoCA, Platform China, the Rotterdam Film Festival, and Gallery Korea. Alexis received her BFA from the Art Institute of Chicago and an MFA from the School of Visual Arts. Fluent in Mandarin, she was a teacher at Gong Yang University in Taiwan and has taught ENL for over 10 years. The digital photography residency will introduce ELL students in grades one through five to the basic concepts and terminologies of photography. Thirty students will attend this residency in two separate sessions. The subgroups represented are students with disabilities and newcomers. The curriculum builds student’s vocabulary, creativity, and observational and critical thinking skills. Student photos taken with Elph cameras will be used as a basis for writing and reflections. The classes will be held in October 2018 through March 2019. The language of instruction in the after school program will be English. Native language resources such as glossaries, dictionaries 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and google translate will be made available. The program will take place on Thursdays from 2:40 to 4:40. A certified ENL teacher and a resident artist will facilitate all sessions. The ENL teacher will differentiate instruction by providing comprehensible input to the students through visuals, realia, vocabulary, the utilization of graphic organizers as well as reading and writing activities. Magic Box Productions resident artist Liz Warren is a writer, teacher, videographer, and editor from Little Rock, Arkansas. She has taught poetry, fiction, theater, photography, English as a Second Language, and film-making in Arkansas, North Carolina, New York, Belgium, and Rwanda. As well as her work with Magic Box, she currently teaches in New York City with Community Word Project and The Writing Institute at Sarah Lawrence College. General supplies such as paper, pencils, pens and markers will be purchased for this program. Equipment such as memory cards and cameras will also be purchased for the program. The supplies and equipment will be set aside and used only for the Title III program. The Title III after school programs will include a supervisor at cost to Title III. There are no other after school programs scheduled for that time, so hiring a supervisor for Title III is necessary to be in the building. The supervisor will be responsible for all administrative and supervisory tasks related to Title III. These tasks include maintaining all Title III documents such as permission slips, attendance rosters, receipts for supplies purchased, and storage of equipment. Attendance will be taken at the start of each session and recorded. Parents will be notified in their preferred languages of any notifications related to the program. The Title III supervisor will also supervise the Title III after school teacher and resident artists through classroom observations to ensure that appropriate scaffolding techniques are used for ELLs during the lessons. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III professional development program at PS 18 will focus on providing teachers with instructional strategies to be used with ELLs in the classroom. High quality professional development assists all teachers in providing effective instruction for ELLs. As per our enrollment data, the ELL population at P.S. 18 is growing. After analyzing the NYSESLAT data we have noticed that our ELLs need to improve their reading and writing skills, especially in Kindergarten through second grade. Upon further analysis of student writing samples, we have found that our ELLs need specific help in phonemic awareness, decoding words, spelling, and sight word recognition. Our professional development program will include training our Title III ENL teachers. The Professional Development will be given through attending Teachers College workshops along with Borough Fields support workshops provided. These workshops will not be at cost to the Title III program. These workshops will have a lasting impact on teacher performance in the classroom. The Title III after school ENL teachers will receive the training and utilize the strategies during the program to provide newcomers, students with disabilities and long term ELLs with appropriate 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development reading and writing strategies. The provider for these PD sessions will be from Teachers College and the NYCDOE. Agendas and proof of attendance will be maintained by the ENL teachers attending the workshops. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III program at P.S. 18 will provide ELL parents with workshops on the new NYSESLAT Exam and its components. Parental understanding of the NYSESLAT Exam and its components is essential in strengthening the home school connection for our ELLs. The home school connection has an important impact on the achievement of ELLs. Communicating with parents is the key to welcoming them and encouraging their participation in school activities. Providing parents with in depth knowledge of the exam will enable them to better prepare their children. A series of three two hour workshops will be held to accommodate the schedules of the parents. The topics of the workshops are: The New NYSESLAT Exam and its components: How to help your child make gains in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Kindergarten. The New NYSESLAT Exam and its components: How to help your child make gains in listening, speaking, reading and writing in grades 1 and 2. The New NYSESLAT Exam and its components: How to help your child make gains in listening, speaking, reading and writing in grades 3, 4 and 5. The workshops will begin in January 2019. Meghan Bulva, ESL teacher will facilitate these workshops. Parents will be notified of these activities through notices in their preferred languages, monthly calendars, outreach by the parent coordinator, and telephone calls. Translators will be available at all parent engagement activity sessions. Records including agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by Ms. Bulva. School staff who speak the preferred languages of the parents will assist in translating the invitations and notices to parents regarding these workshops. We will also be inviting parents to a presentation after each of the Magic Box sessions, parents will be invited to view a presentation of the films and photographs that were created by the students. The students will be presenting and explaining to the audience how they were able to create their project. Notifications will be sent home to the parents in their preferred languages to invite them to this event. 2018-19 CEP 48 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After school program 20 x 63.45= $1,269 (teacher salary - AM program - for 2 teachers) 24 x 63.45 = $1522.80 12 x 60.65= $727.80 (supervisor salary) $2,250.60 = Magic Box/resident artists Parent engagement sessions 3 sessions x 2 hours x 60.65= 363.90 General supplies such as paper, pens, and markers to be used in classrooms. 12,366.00 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 8,835.58 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 3,530.42 12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Winchester School Borough Queens School Number 018 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laurie Ann Careddu Coach Vassiliki Ventouratos ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Meghan Bulva Teacher/Subject Area Andria Scala, SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Corsentino, ENL Related-Service Provider Hollis Israel, Speech Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Leigh DiScala Coach na School Counselor Francine Tapp Parent Veerpal Kaur, Parent Parent Coordinator Marnie Tannenbaum Field Support Center Staff Member na Other (Name and Title) na C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 621 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 96 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.46%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project assessments. This data provides insight about the literacy levels of our ELLs, such as their knowledge of concepts of print, identification of individual letters and sounds, sight words, spelling, and reading strategies they can use. English Language Learners' reading levels are assessed through this program, as well as their literal and inferential comprehension skills. Insight is gained into our ELLs' speaking skills as they retell the stories they have read; this gives the teacher information needed to guide instruction. Each child's strengths and specific needs are highlighted through this assessment and a plan for targeted literacy instruction is developed. This set of assessments correlates to the Fountas and Pinnell system for leveling books and helps teachers match ELLs with books they can read independently and helps students build schema and fluency. ELLs can practice the strategies they learn and acquire new vocabulary in context. Throughout each lesson, students are assessed in a variety of ways. Students are often required to use a checklist, both peer 2018-19 CEP 51  and self, throughout the writing process to assess their work. Thinking Maps are used throughout the lesson for students to plan their work, assess comprehension, and drive further instruction of the skill being taught. Additionally, students may use a post-it parking lot or exit slip at the end of the lesson to ensure understanding of the lesson taught. Students who do not meet the goal/objective are placed in the appropriate small group for further instruction. To guide instruction based on speaking skills, the teacher listens and converses with students during turn and talk and throughout the lesson. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Running Records are given to students at least five times throughout the school year. Data is entered in TC Assessment Pro. The staff reviews data and trends in subgroup populations to address students' individual needs and uses this information to drive instruction. The post-it parking lot, exit slips, Thinking Maps and checklists are used at various times throughout all reading and writing units. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ENL program is evaluated by analyzing data from a number of sources. This includes standardized assessments, informal assessments, and teacher observations and conferences. Through consistent progress monitoring it is evident that our ELLs are making progress through all units of study. The success of the program is also seen in the movement of the ELLs toward the commanding level of the NYSESLAT. Our current and former ELLs are held to the same high standards that all of our students are. We will continue our program of academic rigor to ensure the ongoing success of our ELLs. To assess the early writing skills of our ELLs, a Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project benchmark assessment is used to demonstrate the progress of students' writing performance. The writing prompts correlate with the in-class writing unit. The benchmark exam is used to drive instruction based on each students' writing performance. Reading and writing skills are assessed to determine levels as well as assess students' progress and areas of need. After reviewing scores from NYSESLAT and baseline assessments, it is evident that our ELLs are struggling in organizing and elaborating their written responses. Additionally, our ELLs need improvement with reading comprehension such as using evidence from a story to answer questions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After gathering summative data, the information is shared with the student's classroom teacher and RtI providers to explore ways to address the students' needs. For example, interventions such as Fundations and Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) are used. Additionally, small group instruction takes place within the ENL classroom to target specific skills. Students are referred to the RtI team for more intensive instruction if no progress is made. Students are given appropriate scaffolding based on their assessment performance. Some of the scaffolds provided are word banks, thinking maps, academic vocabulary support, sentence starters, visual support, and modified texts. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RtI framework offers valuable scaffolding for ELLs who are considered at-risk for academic difficulties. As advocates for our ELLs we incorporate all the layers of instructional support to target their specific needs. Through prevention and early intervention, ELLs get the instruction and differentiation they need to successfully gain the literacy and math skills that are expected of all students in their grade. The data from the TCRWP assessments, the NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA , and Math and Science tests are analyzed in June to plan supports for the upcoming school year. Classroom teachers give input in relation to the need for RtI support for their ELLs. Professional Development Mondays provide the staff the opportunity to share ideas on how to support struggling students with Tier 2 interventions. For example, guided reading with a focus on specific skills. After approximately eight weeks students are reevaluated and either continue for an additional cycle or are referred to the RtI team. The RtI team includes the RtI specialist and SETSS provider. Student data is looked at and discussed to come up with a research based plan for a Tier 3 intervention. After 2 weeks of Tier 3 intervention student progress is evaluated to modify the plan as needed. AIS is provided for all students that fall below NYS mandated levels in ELA and Math. Since the state test is given yearly, the 2018-19 CEP 52  school uses other assessment data, including Running records, Writing on Demands, EnVision Math Benchmarks and School Created fiction and nonfiction reading benchmark assessments. Progress is monitored throughout the year, 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Through analysis of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results we have found a variety of proficiency levels from entering to commanding. The ENL groups are arranged by proficiency level and/or grade level. A child's proficiency level will determine how many minutes are allocated to stand alone ENL instruction or integrated classroom instruction. In September, after the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores are finalized, ENL teachers meet to group students and create the ENL program schedule. Based on CR Part 154's mandated minutes, we determine services for ENL instruction.Based on the most recent NYSESLAT scores, we can determine that all students need help in reading comprehension and organizing a written response.The focus for students in grades Kindergarten through second, as well as the entering and emerging students will be on listening, speaking, phonics and sight word recognition. The expanding and commanding students will receive intensive instruction in reading and writing to help them make the necessary gains on the NYSESLAT and in ELA. In grades 3-5 the majority of the students are at the transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. The emphasis on these grades will be on reading and writing so that the students can move to the commanding level and be well prepared for the NYS ELA exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? On selected Mondays at our after-school Professional Development, the ENL teachers present the NYSESLAT and other ELL assessment findings to the school staff to identify instructional goals for our ELLs as well as the progress the students have made. The ENL teachers also present innovative strategies to help classroom teachers of ELLs support their students in vocabulary, reading, and writing. The presentations are created to accommodate the needs of their ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our instruction for ELLs is delivered in integrated ENL and standalone ENL through the pull out and push in models. During standalone instruction, ENL teachers will be developing content based vocabulary, day to day vocabulary, speaking and listening skills, and participating in interactive/shared writing. During integrated ENL instruction, the ENL teacher will build upon classroom instruction. The ENL teacher will provide multiple entry points through use of picture support, sentence starters, word banks, and so on. ELLs and FELLs are grouped heterogeneously within one class per grade level or two contiguous grade levels. Our ENL teachers are dually certified in TESOL and general education. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers work collaboratively in providing ELLs with the scaffolding and vocabulary support they require. The ENL teacher provides small group instruction to meet the various needs of the students based on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 53  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided by strategically planning the placement of all entitled students and carefully scheduling the program to ensure compliance with the CR Part 154.2 mandates for ENL. As programmed in STARS, entering level students receive a total of 360 minutes per week of ENL, including 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging students also receive 360 minutes per week of ENL, including 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, with the flexibility to provide an additional 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any content area. Transitioning students receive a total of 180 minutes per week of ENL, including 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, with the flexibility of providing the additional mandated 90 minutes in standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the ENL program, classroom teachers and ENL teachers meet regularly to align the curriculum to meet the needs of ELLs. The Teacher's College Program is used in reading and writing. Content area curriculum is presented by classroom teachers and science teachers in English. Both ENL and content area teachers work collaboratively in scaffolding the lessons in English. Concepts are often reintroduced using ENL strategies to increase understanding. Academic language and vocabulary development are aligned to grade level reading and writing demands in English. There is a strong emphasis on content area vocabulary. These strategies make core content accessible to our ELLs. Students are introduced to new vocabulary concepts through picture support and building background knowledge from shared experiences such as read alouds, shared writing, experiments, hands on activities and field trips in English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At PS 18, we have a number of staff members who are native speakers of many of the students' home languages: Bengali, Punjabi, Hindi, Urdu, Spanish, Malayalam, Korean, and Cantonese. Our staff members are asked to translate when necessary during assessments, phone calls, conferences, and other communication in the students' home language. In addition, we utilize the NYC DOE translation unit for translation in other languages not represented by our staff. ELLs with a home language of Spanish are evaluated within the first ten days of arrival in their language in order to assess their proficiency in Spanish. As per ELL testing regulations, students are given the opportunity to take the NYS Math and Science Assessments in their native language or with a translator. Furthermore, parents and students are interviewed about family literacy habits and prior schooling. Students who are literate in their home language progress more quickly through the stages of language acquisition. They have developed strategies for learning and they utilize them to move through the stages of language acquisition. Those who struggle with native language literacy need to be taught specific strategies for learning. Instructional materials include a wide range of print, visuals, and realia to support comprehension of the content to be learned. Throughout the course of the year, our paraprofessionals assess students reading and writing in their home languages to monitor and evaluate their progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 54  a. Currently, we do not have any Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). If one were to enroll at our school, he/she would be taught through use of hands on manipulatives, tactile learning, and reading and phonics instruction provided by the ENL teacher, as well as content area, RtI and classroom teachers. b. The majority of our ENL students are newcomers (71 students). These students have been in the US Public School system for 0-3 years. For newcomers In the ENL program, the ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher to provide a literacy rich environment with age and grade appropriate texts. Curriculum and instruction are closely aligned to applicable standards set for all students. The use of scaffolds and differentiation helps our ELLs to meet these standards. Ongoing assessments to monitor progress and creation of attainable goals move the ELLs through the stages of language learning. Small group instruction is set up to facilitate academic discussion. ENL teachers also use computer based translation, the use of visuals and realia, and picture support in the ENL program and regular classroom. Classroom materials are labeled along with a picture of the item to connect words and meaning. Whenever possible, new students are paired up with a buddy that speaks their home language to help foster the transition into their new school environment. Additionally, PS 18 developed a welcome packet to be given to new students. The welcome packet includes a picture dictionary, along with materials for students to use in school to support basic skills needed in the classroom. c. Our school has eight developing ELLs. Developing ELLs have been in the US Public School system for 4-6 years. To support developing ELLs we use realia, collaboration of ENL and classroom teachers, multiple entry points, and context-related material. Developed ELLs are given the opportunity to participate in our Title III after-school program, Magic Box. This program teaches students about movie-making and photography. Students are involved in creating their story and developing it into a movie. This helps them to enjoy new experiences while learning new vocabulary and applying new concepts. d. We have no long term ELLs at this time. A plan for Long Term ELLs is in place. Long Term ELLs will be discussed by our PPT team to ensure they are receiving the proper academic supports. Some of these supports include small group instruction, RtI services, and progress monitoring. e. Former ELLs receive support for 90 minutes per week through our ENL teacher. Additionally, these students work closely with the classroom teacher to help them transition smoothly while applying their English skills independently, without dependence on ENL support. ENL teachers provide support for the classroom teachers on the unique needs of former ELLs (FELLs). A strong emphasis is placed on academic vocabulary and finding text based evidence. Test accommodations for ELLs and former ELLs are put into place by our ELL Coordinator and Assistant Principal. In the beginning of the school year a RLAT report is run to determine current ELLs and former ELLs who have exited ELL status within the past two years. Testing accommodations are provided to the ELLs and FELLs during classroom tests and state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are grouped with general education students to ensure the least restrictive environment.Our focus is on creating high expectations for learning and achievement to maximize the potential for each student. Using the framework, Universal Design for Learning, teachers recognize that every student learns differently. New material is presented using texts, charts, video clips, and computer software. Tasks are broken down as needed into short term goals and learning is expressed in a variety of ways. Student choice is valued and the learning styles of the students are taken into consideration when planning instruction. As a resource, both classroom and AIS/RtI teachers use the Fundations program to support the acquisition of phonemic awareness. Best practices are employed for our ELLs in the classroom through the use of shared reading and interactive read alouds. The classroom teacher is supported by the ENL teacher in incorporating ESL methodology to support all ELLs. The TC Units of study in reading and writing are tailored to help them attain English language proficiency. The TC staff works with the teachers individually towards these goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 55  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Ongoing assessments of our ELLs' capabilities in ELA, math and science, as well as assessments to check progress in listening, speaking and writing skills, are used to formulate plans for targeted and differentiated instruction to meet the needs of our ELLs. The ENL program is both rigorous and differentiated to allow them to access the lesson based on their needs. They are challenged and given the support and assistance that permits them to perform at the next level. Effective scaffolded instruction based on the individual needs of our entering and emerging ELLs includes: pre-teaching of key vocabulary, providing thinking maps, supplying them with word banks and sentence starters, picture support and giving them opportunities to discuss what they are learning with their peers. Sheltered learning techniques are used in the content areas to make the content comprehensible and to develop their critical thinking skills. Students' prior knowledge is activated to help them in critical thinking and content development. These techniques move all levels of ELLs, while they are acquiring their English language skills. Interventions in social studies are provided through small group instruction, visual support, word banks, sentence starters, leveled text, maps and atlases as well as differentiated tasks. Interventions in science are provided through the use of experiments and hands on activities, bilingual glossaries, word banks, sentence starters, leveled text and project based research. Our Title III program scaffolds ELLs in listening, reading, writing and speaking through photography and film production residencies. This program is offered mainly to entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs. Our RTI framework offers supports for ELLs who are considered at risk. Home Language support is made available to ELLs through ongoing opportunities in writing and speaking. Turn and talk strategies are implemented with partners of the same language to strengthen conceptualization and vocabulary enrichment in both the ELLs home language and English. Our Enrichment, AIS and RTI teachers provided targeted intervention to our ELLs and FELLs by analyzing student data and providing lessons to address areas where improvement is needed. Programs such as Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Fundations, Guided Reading, Explode The Code and Great Leaps. When students reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT they continue to be scaffolded by the AIS program in literacy and math as needed. These students receive extended time (1 ½) on all standardized tests for a two year period from the time they reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Staff is made available to help ELLs as they transition from the elementary to the middle school level. The ENL teacher is in contact with the ENL teachers from the middle schools to help introduce students to their new support team. The guidance counselor meets with ELLs to discuss their concerns and feelings related to this transition. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trends from the NYSESSLAT and NYSITELL, the data showed that ELLs need improvement in both writing and reading. Specifically ELLs need support in organizing their writing as well as elaboration. For reading, ELLs need support in reading comprehension such as using evidence from the text to support their answer. Both journal writing and interactive writing will be used to improve students writing organization and elaboration. To improve their reading skills, students will be exposed to a variety of texts through visual aids, previewing the text and vocabulary, and asking and answering questions. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs / services for ELLs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are encouraged to participate in all school programs. All ELLs are invited to the Title III before/after school instructional program which helps to develop language skills in various ways. For example, we offer photography and film making residencies as well as programs for test taking strategies and skills. Our school wide programs consist of chorus, Suzuki violin and Early Scholars, which are also available to our ELLs. The Science, Art and Physical Education, and our most popular, International night, are well attended by ELLs, FELLs, and their families. Our cultural events are arranged by students, their parents and teachers to create awareness of culture, by exposing the school community to new traditions, food, and values. Fifth grade ELLs take part in the Ballroom Dance program and enjoy the senior trip, picnic and dance party. ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs by ensuring full participation through the use of flexible scheduling by our assistant principal. Schedules are arranged strategically to ensure that ELLs could fully participate in any of the programs offered. 2018-19 CEP 56  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Vocabulary development is a part of every discipline within our school community. In Reading, the Common Core State Standards are our focus, giving students the opportunity to comprehend informational texts. Resources for science and social studies are available to teachers as well as new non-fiction books to add to the rich classroom libraries. The Harcourt Science Program is being implemented in grades K-5 which includes one Lab period per week with their Science cluster teacher. In Math, all grades are using the Envisions 2.0 program. Teachers are using a variety of problem solving strategies to support math thinking in oral and written form. Student are encouraged to explain and justify their mathematical ideas through the Envisions program as well as using Exemplars. All grades participate in Number Talks which allows students to talk and demonstrate their understanding of addition and subtraction. Our ELLs benefit from the small group instruction that takes place in their classrooms in all areas of study. In the area of technology, all classrooms are equipped with Smartboards and document cameras. Classrooms also have stationary desktop computers in which students are encouraged to use online reading and math programs such as Epic, along with doing research for content specific projects. Laptop carts carrying student laptops are available for student use as well. The website, "The Literacy Shed," is used to encourage student led discussions in the classroom. Students lead the discussion based on the video and ask and develop questions. Teachers also utilize the technology to provide students with materials in their native language through the use of translation apps and websites and by translating articles used in classroom discussions. Word to word bilingual dictionaries and content area bilingual glossaries are also used during the ENL class time. Picture dictionaries are available for student use in the classrooms as well. During the course of the year, teachers will be implementing an enrichment program in which students will choose from a variety of electives: Art Studio, Chorus, Chess, and Theater. In addition, our ELLs were given the opportunity to participate in a Title III program which involves them in photography and media through learning about cameras and different forms of photography and movie making. The materials used in the ENL program are diverse. The following are some of the materials used: The Daily Language Review Book is used to support grammar, sentence structure and syntax. Words Their Way is used throughout grade levels to support students with word study. Several series are used to prepare students for the NYSESLAT exam such as Continental New York ELLs, Empire State NYSESLAT, and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT by Attanasio and Associates. An extensive leveled library is also a major focus in the ENL classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program newcomer ELLs are buddied with other students who speak their home language. Our paraprofessionals in the school are bilingual and speak the following languages: Punjabi, Urdu, Bengali, Malayalam, Chinese, Korean and Spanish. They are readily available to assist our ELLs with any academic or social challenges they may face. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are provided to the students as needed. Our ELLs are also provided with the NYS approved bilingual glossaries in the content areas of mathematics and science. Technology is also utilized through the use of iPads for home language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL program supports the literacy development of our ELLs at every grade level and every stage of literacy development. There is collaboration with the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher to provide a rigorous academic environment for our ELLs. The classroom environment is rich in grade level appropriate materials and texts. By practicing small group instruction, one on one conferences, and ENL teaching strategies, ELLs gain access to grade appropriate concepts and materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building at this time. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 57  Upon registration, newly enrolled ELLs and their families are given a tour of the school by the Parent Coordinator. At that time they meet the ENL Teacher and learn about the school, support services, staff and programs offered. Interpreters are available to assist in this process. During the first ten days of an ELL student's enrollment, parents are required to come to school for an orientation to choose an ELL program for their child. At this time parents are given specific information about what they can do to help ensure their child's success in school. When an English Language Learner enrolls at PS 18, they are given a welcome packet in their home language, complete with school expectations as well as language resources to help the student transition smoothly. The ENL teacher gives a walking tour of the building to allow students to get acquainted with their new environment. A before or after school program is offered for the ELLs to strengthen ELLs in all aspects of English Language Arts. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? A Spanish language elective is offered to ELLs in the gifted and talented program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 18 has ongoing, in depth professional development to ensure strong classroom instruction that fosters academic success for all students. Professional Development opportunities are provided to school staff including teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, psychologists, therapists, guidance, secretaries and the parent coordinator. These sessions take place during the Monday professional development sessions, professional development days, as well as outside opportunities. Instructional strategies learned at outside professional development sessions are shared with all teachers. Our special education team also provides workshops throughout the year on behavior management and differentiated instruction. The focus is on making content more accessible and interactive in ways that support the ELLs and all learners. There are days that are scheduled with the Teacher's College staff developers to provide professional development in literacy instruction in a rigorous progression of skills such as phonics, vocabulary, reading, writing, listening and speaking that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. During these professional development periods teachers are involved in reviewing student work, modifying and adjusting curriculum objectives, and learning how to modify instructional practices that address the needs and build on the strengths of the individual learners in their classes, with a focus on ELLs. Teachers are offered a menu of calendar days at Teacher's College that are both grade and content specific. A synopsis of the TC calendar days and minutes from sessions with the TC staff developer is kept on file. Queens Borough North also offers support for ENL teachers focusing on strategies for ELLs in the classroom along with testing support for the ENL teacher. All professional development agendas and attendance sheets for ELL personnel including all teachers of ELLs is kept in a yearly PD binder. On a weekly basis teachers are engaged in collaborative inquiry groups that focus on looking at student work and planning instructional programs to increase the proficiency levels of all students. An emphasis has been placed on differentiation of instruction and engaging students with one another around rigorous academic content while developing language and literacy through the content areas. The Danielson rubrics and DOK levels are the focus to promote complex thinking for all students. There is also a focus on deepening teacher understanding of the content and cognitive demands of the CCLS and the math and ELA performance tasks. An emphasis is also placed on further understanding the principles set forth in the Universal Design for 2018-19 CEP 58  Learning and how to apply them to customize instructional plans to meet the range of learners in our schools. Collaborative inquiry also takes place on the CCLS literature and math tasks and the Universal Design for Learning. The ENL teachers provide a series of professional development including Welcoming ELLs, Classroom Support, Academic Language, Teaching Tools and Strategies for ELLs, and Interactive Word Walls. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school keeps in contact with the ELL Coordinators at MS 172 and MS 67 to provide the teachers with the information they need to support our ELLs as they transition to middle schools. The NYSITELL scores, most recent NYSESLAT scores and names of ELLs and former ELLs are provided to the middle schools in advance. As the designated middle school liaison, the Guidance Counselor will attend PD sessions that are targeted to enable her to meet the responsibilities of this role such as understanding the middle school choice selection process. The information is then turn-keyed to the fifth grade teachers and the parent coordinator. They provide additional support for families during this process. We arrange for interpreters to be available for the parents. PS 18 will ensure that the professional development requirements for staff are met as per CR Part 154.2 by strategically planning in house and outside PD sessions. All staff members have been made awareof this requirement, as well as all new CR Part 154 requirements during the Monday professional development sessions. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required PD hours for all teachers must be dedicated to language acquisition, including integrating language and content instruction for all English Language Learners. This will be accomplished during the weekly PD sessions at the school which will focus on academic vocabulary, scaffolding for ELLs, and collaborative best practices. In order to meet the 15% of professional development requirements of general education teachers, the ENL teacher will turn-key current ENL information and strategies for classroom teachers on how to support their ELLs in their classrooms. Teachers will also be given the opportunity to participate in PD from outside sources such as the UFT and DELLSS. Our ENL teachers will receive a minimum of fifty percent of their required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core area instruction by attending in house professional development sessions, as well as attending PD opportunities from Teacher's College, NYCDOE, DELLSS, and the UFT. The school is made aware of all ELL PD opportunities through the weekly e-blast from the DOE. Attendance records and agendas are kept in a yearly binder for all professional development sessions attended by staff both in house and outside of the school. Teachers who hold professional certificates will also update their professional development records online through the NYS Teach system. Some additional professional learning opportunities provided by Queens North BFSC are the ELL Liasion Meetings for District 26 and Bilingual Special Education Institute. Teacher's College also offers professional development on Preventing Over-referral of ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals, progress, needs, and assessment results during parent engagement sessions on Tuesday afternoons from 2:45 to 3:55pm. Parents are informed about their child's reading, writing, listening and speaking progress in all content areas. If a parent is unable to attend a meeting during this time slot, we would schedule an early morning or after school meeting. During this time the ENL teacher may present summative assessment data, such as scores from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Additionally, the ENL and classroom teachers may use formative assessment data such as conference notes and student work to discuss goals and progress with parents. During this time, we discuss strategies and techniques used in the classroom and small group settings to best meet the needs of each child. When necessary, provisions for interpretation and translation are provided. First, we review the school staff language survey to locate an interpreter in the school. If an interpreter is unavailable, we would use the telephone interpretation service provided by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 59  A newsletter will also be sent home to support parents when working with their children at home. Tips, strategies and websites will be provided to assist parents and their children. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to the scheduled parent teacher conferences, parents are encouraged to participate in classroom activities during the course of the school year such as writing celebrations, read alouds and open school days. Ongoing newsletters from teachers and teacher websites apprise parents of what their children are learning in each subject area and provide tips for what parents can do to support their child's success. Invitations to parents to participate in classroom activities are also included in the newsletters. Scheduled school wide events are publicized through the use of flyers and telephone alerts. Events include curriculum / content workshops, Art Night, Physical Education Night, Science Night, International Night, Movie Night and the Spring Fling. International Night is a night that celebrates every students cultures. Parents and students are encouraged to dress up in their cultures clothes and bring food. Parents are also provided with language support from the school that gives them the opportunity to interact within the community. When new students are admitted the parents are given a tour of the school and cultural diversity is addressed. Additionally the school staff and PTA work together to provide parents with information at PTA meetings on topics such as school safety, cyber bullying, promoting a child's self esteem as well as parenting tips. Flyers distributed prior to the events request parents to notify our parent coordinator of their needs for interpretation services in the required languages. The predominant languages requested are Punjabi, Urdu and Spanish. Parent involvement is highly encouraged in our school community. Once a month, parents are invited into classrooms to participate in academic activities such as STEM projects. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The goal of the school community is to support ELLs so they can be successful and have equal opportunities for success. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laurie Ann Careddu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Winchester School School DBN: 26Q018 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laurie Ann Careddu Title Principal Leigh DiScala Assistant Principal Marnie Tannenbaum Parent Coordinator Meghan Bulva ENL/Bilingual Teacher Veerpal Kaur Parent Andria Scala, SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Vassiliki Ventouratos, RTI/Coa Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Francine Tapp School Counselor Rosalind Valenza Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Rosalind Valenza Michelle Corsentino Other ENL Teacher na na Other na Other na Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 10/17/2017 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q018 School Name: The Winchester School Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marnie Tannenbaum Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration at PS 18, parents or guardians complete a HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) which is part of the student's cumulative folder. An additional copy is also kept by the ELL Coordinator. The ELL Coordinator interviews the parent during this process to make sure that the form is completed properly and accurately. The survey requests information as to the languages that are spoken in the home and how frequently these languages are spoken. It also asks the parents to identify their preferred languages in which they wish to receive oral and written communication from the school. This information is then entered into ATS by the pupil accounting secretary. The preferred languages of the parents are updated over time through the language preference information provided by parents on the blue emergency cards. A RAPL and RCPL report is run on ATS to determine the language preferences of the parents. Our administrative team and our ELL Coordinator often receive requests from staff members regarding translation needs. They then identify a staff member or community member that speaks the target language. If no staff member or community member is available for the target language the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit or an approved DOE vendor is used. The school 2018-19 CEP 63  uses this information to make every effort in providing notices and information in other languages so that parents are informed of school events and policies. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Bengali Chinese French Gujarati Hindi Korean Mandarin Malayalam Nyanja Pashto Pilipino Punjabi Sinhalese Spanish Tamil Thai Urdu 688 82.79 676 81.35 15 22 2 5 13 24 0 8 0 1 2 21 1 9 1 1 18 1.81 2.65 0.24 0.6 1.56 2.89 0 0.96 0 0.12 0.24 2.53 0.12 1.08 0.12 0.12 2.17 16 20 2 8 12 27 3 7 1 1 2 25 1 10 1 1 18 1.93 2.41 0.24 0.96 1.44 3.25 0.36 0.84 0.12 0.12 0.24 3.01 0.12 1.2 0.12 0.12 2.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the list of parents’ preferred languages, the only language that represents at least a 10% population of the school is English. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 64  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Principal’s newsletter Monthly School calendar Monthly Notices for Parent Teacher Conferences September, October, March and May Notices about curriculum night September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. The Principal's newsletters will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Newsletters will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Calendars will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time 2018-19 CEP 65  Notices about the New York State exams September Notices about each New York State exam Two weeks prior to exam Notices about test preparation program October Title III program information November to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices and information will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 66  Notices about Art Night November Notice about Physical Education Night March Notice about Science Night June ELL Notices (orientation, entitlement, continuance, and non-entitlement) September and as needed At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. At PS 18, there are many staff members including teachers and paraprofessionals who are native speakers of many languages. Notices will be translated by staff members.Those staff members may also make a phone call to the student's home to follow up that this notice was received. If there are no staff members to translate for a given language we utilize the NYC DOE Interpretation Unit for translation of the notices and forms. Forms will be completed in English with enough time to be translated by school staff or to be sent out for translation, if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night/ Curriculum Night September Parent-teacher conferences November and March Parent-Teacher Night May IEP meetings As necessary Registration As necessary interpretation service(s)? Formal and informal face-to-face meetings take place throughout the school year. For Back to School Night staff members who speak other languages are able to provide interpretation services. If there is no staff member available for translation at any given meeting, the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate. Formal and informal face-to-face conferences take place throughout the school year. School staff is available for interpretation at face-to-face meetings during school hours. Teachers or paraprofessionals may be available to provide interpretation during Parent-Teacher conferences. If there is no staff member available for translation at an evening meeting, the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate. School staff is available for interpretation at formal face-to-face meetings, such as Parent-Teacher Night. If there is no staff member available for translation at times such as an evening meeting, the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate. For IEP meetings, school staff is available for interpretation. If there is no staff member available for translation, the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate. Registration takes place throughout the school year. School staff is available for interpretation throughout the day. If there is no staff member available for translation the NYC DOE Translation 2018-19 CEP 68  and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, PS 18’s communication strategy to reach limited-English proficient families would be to have our school staff including teachers and paraprofessionals (who speak the same language as the families) make phone calls to notify the families of the school emergency in their home language. Robo calls are also done in preferred languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. PS 18 ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 by training them in how to use translation and interpretation services by providing them with professional development sessions on the resources available through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. The Translation and Interpretation Guide, Language ID Guide and Language Palm Card will be distributed at the PD session. Our office staff and security guard will also be provided with these resources. Our Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will also send a letter to staff to inform them of the mandates as described in Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. This letter will also provide staff with the contact information for the LAC and encourage them to contact the LAC with any questions. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has assigned a Language Allocation Coordinator (LAC) in galaxy and has received a Language Access Kit. The Welcome Poster has been displayed prominently in our school lobby. The Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access have been distributed. Our office staff and security officer have been provided with the Language ID Guide. We ensure that documents containing critical information must be translated in each of the covered languages. (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu.) Interpretation services will be given to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who request language services in order to communicate with the DOE regarding critical information about their child's education. Staff will use all the resources available to them through the Translation and Interpretation Unit, and available language services and vendors. Our school also makes every effort to inform parents of the notification requirements for translation interpretation services for non-covered languages by utilizing school staff and approved DOE vendors. Limited-English proficient parents will be made aware of their right to receive information at various times. Parents will be notified at Back to School night, PTA meetings, and one-on-one meetings with their child’s teacher. Parents of 2018-19 CEP 69  ELLs will be told about their rights at their child’s initial ELL orientation meeting. There they will hear information about the ELL programming in the NYC DOE. There also are translated signs in the front of the school and letters will be shared with parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services by distributing a translation and interpretation survey. The results of the survey will be used to improve the quality and availability of these services. During and after interpretation sessions, parents will be asked via telephone or face to face meetings about their satisfaction with these services. Parents will be encouraged to provide feedback as to the quality of translated documents. All translators and vendors will be informed as to parental comments concerning these documents. We will also create a focus group of parents that is inclusive of all languages and cultures to gather feedback and best practices for translation and interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 70 
