2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q020 School Name: P.S. 020 JOHN BOWNE Principal: VICTORIA HART 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 25Q020 John Bowne 342500010020 Pre K - 5 142-30 Barclay Ave Flushing, NY 11355 718-359-0321 Phone Number: 718-359-0004 Fax: Victoria Rice VRice@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Victoria Rice Lisa Barton Glenda Gonzalez Victoria Rice Glenda Gonzalez Denise Eng Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place DDimang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7690 Phone Number: 718-281-7605 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-6152 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Victoria Rice Lisa Barton Glenda Gonzalez KonstantinaBardis MagdelanaAmaya Denise Eng ChristineFonte JaniceEagen Dong Tong Min *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EufraciaSandoval Lorena Llovato Elizabeth Wilmot Jessica Zarian Kathryn Tang KatelynRosenberg Bi YingChen YanYu Gao Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement is to provide a safe, caring community for all children, to be responsive to the children’s academic needs and to encourage a feeling of self-worth so that children will be college and career ready. Our brand - S.T.A.R.S. - S-Striving for strong foundations in all content areas, T- Thinking critically, A- Acknowledging and celebrating diversity, R-Recognizing and managing emotions, S- Setting and monitoring goals. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.20 John Bowne Elementary School is a Title I School located in downtown Flushing with a population of more than 1200 students. Over 90% of our students are eligible for free or reduced lunch. 36% of our diverse student population are English Language Learners (ELL). 70% of our students are Asian, 21% are Hispanic, 3% are Black, and 2% are white, 139 of our students have Individualized Education Plan (IEPs). P.S.20 has established strategic collaborations / partnerships and special initiatives as follows: 1. Chinese American Planning Council (CPC) *This year CPC has secured a 5 year grant through the Brooke Astor Foundation. The target population is third grade ELLs in the current CPC Compass (Comprehensive After School System) with the goal of improving the foundational reading skills. 2. The Arts *Arts Connection for Dance - This partnership develops literacy skills for ELLs through interpretive dance. Our dance teacher will participate in a partnership with Arnhold New Dance Teacher Support Program (Office of Arts and Special Projects). The goal is to further develop the professional capacity of our dance teacher. *Cultural After School Adventures (CASA) - The CASA grant will be used for a partnership with a select group of students in order to enhance the students’ experience through interactive art activities. *Ballet Tech - Select second grade students receive training in ballet by professional dancers off site once a week. *Art Dance Grant (Arnhold Program) focus on Careers in Theater (3rd grade target population) *Dance Room Grant to create a dance studio *Morgan Library partnership with our 4th grade *MOMA partnership to build capacity around visual arts for our art teachers 3. Health and Wellness *Move-to-Improve - Training for teachers to encourage fitness and meet the Physical Education hours. * Physical Education Grant - A licensed P.E. teacher was hired to further develop and align our physical education program with state requirements. *Sanford Harmony Program for students grades PreK-5 addressing social emotional learning *Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) trained staff members 4. NY Cares 2018-19 CEP 10  *Adult ENL – A Saturday program through NY Cares targeting our parents in order to enhance their conversational English. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 434 students of our diverse student population are English Language Learners (ELL). 11.48% of the students have Individualized Education Plan (IEPs) 61.8% of SWDs are males 46% of SWDs are ELLS *Students with disabilities (SWD) - scaffolded instruction, varied entry points, reduced student teacher ratio, instruction and support aligned to Individualized educational plans, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Common Core aligned resources and materials. *Targeted RTI students - continuing to develop instructional strategies and rigorous instruction that effectively address diverse student needs / abilities in English Language Arts and mathematics. *ELL - to attain English proficiency, focused instruction in the four modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing, scaffolded instruction, varied entry points, UDL, Common Core aligned resources and materials, The Writing Revolution. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great schools for which our school made the most progress over the past year is in "Effective School Leadership" The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has identified as a key area of focus for this school year is rigorous instruction. After an analysis of multiple data sources, the P.S. 20 community collaboratively devised the Instructional Focus for the 2018-2019 school year. "Instructional staff will engage in utilizing a clear set of research based instructional approaches that support students in thinking critically and developing strong foundations across all content areas.." Work around our school brand will also address the element of The Framework for Great Schools. S – Striving for strong foundations in all content areas T – Thinking critically 2018-19 CEP 11  A – Acknowledging and celebrating diversity R – Recognizing and managing emotions S – Setting and monitoring goals 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q020 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1314 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 65 66 45 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 8 45 45 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 86.7% % Reduced Lunch 34.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 19.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.08 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 76 70 45 95.6% 6.7% 11.7% 4.4% 73.4% 1.1% 8 11% 8.8 68.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In alignment with the district goals and upon receipt of the 2017-2018 English Language Arts Assessment data, strengths were as follows: Level 4's increased by 3.4% for all grades   Proficiency of Grade 5 students increased by 8.7%  Proficiency of targeted subgroups increased: Black increased by 7.1%/Hispanic increased by 6.8% Areas of Need:  Although there was an increase in the proficiency rate of our students in ELA, we are continuing to strive to increase this rate to align with the district goal for ELA.  Grades who were not yet exposed to the 3Ls approach did not make as much progress in ELA proficiency. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will build strong foundations in English Language Arts through the implementation of the 3L's Approach for reading (Learning, Language, Literacy: Maryann Cucchiara) and The Writing Revolution program (Judith Hochman). Aligned professional development will include a clear set of instructional approaches, the use of data to drive curricula and instructional decision making as well as unit planning that focuses on deepening students' comprehension, content understanding and ability to develop cohesive explanatory and argumentative writing pieces from a variety of sources. This work will result in a minimum of a 5% increase in the number of students successfully attaining proficiency on the 2019 New York State English Language Arts assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change Grade-level teacher teams will analyze 2018 ELA June instructional reports, EDAT, and NYS ELA assessment data to identify performance trends. Sept. 2018 - Oct. 2018 (Mondays) Sept. 2018 - June 2019 (bi-monthly) Administrators All Teachers Administrators, Teacher Teams Monthly Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019 Grade 3-5 Teachers, ENL Teachers, Science Teachers Pre-K - 5 Classroom Teachers in Grades K-5 will participate in professional development sessions on the Writing Revolution. These sessions will be lead by a team of lead teachers who attend ongoing institutes around this work. Classroom Teachers in Grades 3-5 will participate in professional development sessions on the 3Ls approach to Literacy. These sessions will be lead by a team of lead teachers who have been trained in this work over the past four year. K - 5 Grade 3-5 2018-19 CEP 15 As a result of professional development sessions, checklists will be developed by administrators that indicate a clear set of approaches and strategies that should be evident within classrooms and in units of study. K-5 teachers will administer a beginning, middle and end of the year on-demand writing assessments to assess student growth as a result of professional learning and implementation. K-5 Teachers Grade 3-5 teachers will administer baseline, interim and summative reading assessments to track student progress towards reaching ELA proficiency. K-5 Classroom Teachers 3-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 (monthly) Sept. 2018 - June 2019 (monthly) Administrators K-5 Teachers Administrators Classroom Teachers Writing Revolution Teacher Leads Sept. 2018- June 2019 (monthly) Administrators Classroom Teachers 3Ls Teacher Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement workshops will be developed by Lead Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Administrators and Parent Coordinator to inform and engage parents in the Literacy initiatives this school year. November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 Parents will also be invited to observe the implementation of these initiatives within the classroom so they can further support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 16  -Advance System for Teacher Evaluations -Title III 3Ls Lead Teacher positions -Googledocs -Tri-State Rubric -Grade-level Curriculum Maps -Planning sessions with Cabinet and Lead Teachers -Inquiry plan -Professional development plan -Council for Great City Schools online platform -District 25 and P.S. 20 professional development sessions with Maryann Cucchiara on the 3Ls work -P.S. 20 professional development sessions with Judith Hochman: The Writing Revolution Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all Grade 3-5 students will take a reading assessment to monitor growth towards goal. A minimum of a 3% increase in Levels 3 and 4 will determine that students are making adequate progress towards the June 2019 5% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Grades 3-5: Baseline, mid-point and benchmark reading assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 Social Emotional Learning Survey, two thirds of the staff expressed that relationships between staff members and students were a concern. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will foster a Supportive Environment school-wide, through living our school's Emotional Intelligence Charter as well as Classroom Charters and integrating recognizing, understanding, labeling, expressing, and regulating (RULER) emotions within all classrooms. This will be evidenced by OORS data that result in a 5% reduction of level 3 and 4 infractions. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Daily, select staff members will continue Phase 2 of PBIS (Check In/Check Out Mentoring Program). Mentors were selected to work with students based on a variety of criteria including the student's home language to ensure purposeful discussion during check In and check out. The daily progress monitoring tool is differentiated to ensure it is age-appropriate and addresses the needs of diverse population of learners, which includes ENLs and students with disabilities. All school staff and mentored students All staff and students Principal Assistant Principals SEL Team All Teachers Guidance Counselors Sept. 2018 - June 2019 SAPIS Worker Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Team will meet biweekly to reflect on professional learning from the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years in order to effectively implement and support the use of the RULER anchor tools with students. The tools are age appropriate and are differentiated to meet the needs of all learners (translated mood meter, meta-moment, and blueprint presentations and resources). Students Weekly, teachers will utilize the differentiated resources within the Sanford Harmony and RULER programs to meet the needs of all students. Teachers and SEL Team members will conduct celebratory assemblies to highlight students exhibiting positive character traits as well as bi-monthly assemblies to introduce the current PBIS themes (Safety, Control, Outreach, Respect, Effort). All students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Paraprofessionals School Aides School Based Support Team SEL Team members, Principal Assistant Principals Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  Weekly, teachers will continue to create and sustain classroom environments that are respectful and that build positive social skills and emotional awareness through the use of Sanford Harmony and RULER lessons. Classroom teachers will implement RULER and Sanford Harmony lessons and activities that help students recognize, understand, label, express, and regulate their emotions as well as encourage conversations and collaborations in order for students to work, create and problem-solve with their peers. Monthly, administrators will conduct SEL walk-throughs to assess the social and emotional learning environments in the school building. The Social Emotional Learning (SEL) team will conduct bimonthly cycles of professional planning to develop practices within the classroom that address core social and emotional learning competencies (self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationships skills, responsible decision-making). All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers Assistant Principals Teachers School-Based Support Team SEL Team All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals All Staff Sept. 2018-2019 Principal Bimonthly, the SEL team and selected staff members will conduct workshops for parents in conjunction with the parent coordinator, guidance counselor, and SAPIS worker on PBIS, Sanford Harmony and RULER initiatives (the invitation letters, presentations, and supporting materials are translated). All students and parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals SEL Team Principal Assistant Principals Teachers SEL Team School-Based Support team 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement sessions around PBIS, Sanford Harmony and RULER initiatives: Administrators, SEL Team Members, Teachers, School Based Support Team: monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SEL Team- consists of administration, teachers of different grade levels, guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, school aides, paraprofessionals Substitute teachers to ensure the attendance of the SEL team for meetings during school hours SEL Team per session Student incentives/rewards Classroom materials to support PBIS and RULER Materials for parent workshops Substitute teachers to ensure the attendance of selected staff members who will lead parent workshops during school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the SEL Environment walk-throughs, administrators and the members of the SEL team will monitor and assess the criteria indicated on the SEL tool with a specific focus on student-to-student relationships to reduce level 3 and 4 infractions (September -June 2019). By February 2019, there will be a minimum decrease of 2.5% of Level 3 and 4 infractions schoolwide in comparison to 2017-2018 OORS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SEL Walk-through tool, OORS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In alignment with the district goals and upon receipt of the 2017-2018 Mathematics Assessment data, strengths were as follows:  68.6% of students scored a Level 3 or 4  Black subgroup increased by 11% in proficiency .  Asian students scored at 78% proficiency. Areas of Need:  Hispanic subgroups slipped 5% from 38% to 33% proficiency.  Black subgroup is at 26.1% proficiency  Minimal progress for Grades 3-5 overall in math. We increased in proficiency by .10 % . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in at least one cycle of inquiry around mathematics instruction. Tools/checklists will be utilized to identify high quality practices to improve critical thinking of students during math lessons. The impact of these inquiry sessions will be measured by a 5% increase in students attaining Levels 3 and 4 and a 5% decrease in the achievement gap of targeted subgroups on pre and post assessments in mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). K-5 teachers will analyze 2018 NYS Math assessment data and identify high priority areas in math standards. K-5 Teachers (Sept./Oct. 2018) Administrators, K-5 teachers will further engage in an analysis of progress of subgroups in mathematics Grade level teams will identify focus standards to address during an inquiry cycle related to math as well as Algebra for All practices that support critical thinking and rigorous application of math content. As part of the Inquiry cycle, teachers will engage in unpacking the content they are addressing to ensure they have a deep understanding of the math content. A4A Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers K-5 Teachers (Sept./Oct. 2018) Administrators, K-5 Teachers A4A Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers (Sept.2018-June 2019: Monthly) Administrators, A4A Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers 2018-19 CEP 23  (Sept.2018-June 2019: Monthly) Administrators, K-5 Teachers A4A Lead Teachers Teachers will also identify strategies that will help support the need of targeted subgroups. K-5 Teachers/Student Subgroups (Sept.2018-June 2019: Monthly) Grade level teams will administer pre and post assessments to monitor progress. (October, 2018/February 2019/ May 2019) K-5 Teachers Administrators, A4A Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers Administrators, K-5 Teachers A4A Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From December 2018 to June 2019, a minimum of 2 Mathematics parent newsletters will be created for each grade level. These newsletters will support parents in understanding the types of activities they can engage students in to deepen their content understanding. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advance system for teacher evaluations Schedules for intervisitations Human Resources (Substitute Teachers) /per diem for outside professional sessions. CARP team per session Algebra for All team per session Materials for parent newsletters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all Grade 3-5 students will take a mathematics assessment to monitor growth towards goal. A minimum of a 3% increase in Levels 3 and 4 will determine that subgroup students are making adequate progress towards the June 2019 5% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year mathematics assessment in grades K-5 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 OORS report data, there was a reduction in the number of incidents for the identified students participating in the PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Supports) Tier II Mentoring Program. The review of the beginning, middle and end of the year Writing Revolution assessments, analyzed by the writing revolution team and administrators, exhibited gains in writing proficiency. We utilized the Language, Literacy, and Learning (3Ls) observation tool to identify growth in Cucchiara practices. Grade five teachers are currently implementing 100% of the practices highlighted in the 3Ls observation tool and are prepared to support the expansion of these practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will build systems and structures that will enable administrators to assess and evaluate the progress of school-wide professional learning initiatives (Cucchiara, The Writing Revolution, Emotional Intelligence, PBIS, RULER.) This will result in a minimum of 85% of teachers successfully implementing the components within initiative evaluation tools. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Instructional leaders will develop walk-through tools in the areas of reading, writing, and social emotional learning with a focus on consistent instructional practices across classrooms. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Monthly Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Teachers will engage in professional development opportunities around the Writing Revolution, Cucchiara, and RULER. Teachers Weekly Administrators Lead Teachers/Administrators will analyze school-wide data obtained through the walk-throughs and make timely adjustments to professional development to support instructional needs. Lead Teachers/Administrators will conduct purposeful data-based conversations following walk-throughs with a focus on observations. Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administration Teachers Teachers Monthly Administrators Administration Sept. 2108 - Teachers June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Report Cards, Parent Engagement workshops, Individual parent meetings, SLT meetings: Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, School Aides, Paraprofessionals, School Based Support Team: Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  The Writing Revolution: A Guide to Advancing Thinking through Writing in All Subjects and Grades by Judith C. Hochman and Natalie Wexler Sanford Harmony RULER Resources The Writing Revolution Team The Social Emotional Learning Team Cucchiara Lead Teachers Google Docs (The Writing Revolution teacher created resources/lessons) Datacation Walk-through tools Advance Observation data Curriculum Maps/Cucchiara Units of Study, The Writing Revolution Pacing Guides Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators will analyze school-wide data obtained through walk-throughs and observation tools to ensure that a minimum of 75% of teachers are consistently implementing professional learning practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Walk-through tools, the Writing Revolution Student Assessment Checklist, and Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 Social Emotional Intelligence survey, we developed a school wide charter with a focus on how we want to feel at PS 20 as well as skills to utilize when conflict arises. After engaging in professional development with staff during the 2017-2018 school year, we are prepared to engage parents/families in workshops to enhance their working knowledge of RULER. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will build “Strong Roots” by empowering parents/families through strategic parent/family professional learning opportunities resulting in at least two workshop series on Emotional Intelligence, aligned to district and school based goals as evidenced by agendas, workshop presentations and sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Develop a calendar of parent engagement opportunities that focus on the social/emotional well being of children. These opportunities will align to our PBIS, Sanford Harmony and RULER initiatives.  Parent Engagement in their spoken language (home)   In school parenting classes In school parent and child counseling Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019, May 2019 Parent Coordinator Administrators Teachers Parent-Teacher Association and School Leadership Team Committee parents Guidance Counselor Parent self assessment surveys will be developed to assist parents in identifying what opportunities would best support their child's social/emotional needs and well being. Families Feedback surveys will also be developed to measure the impact of parent engagement opportunities offered. October 2018 February 2019 Teachers Administrators Parents May 2019 Students Student feedback forms / surveys Parent Coordinator School Mental Health Consultant Guidance Counselors 2018-19 CEP 30 Administrators and Guidance Counselor will review OORS data on a monthly basis. Trends will be identified and systems and structures will be developed to address these areas of need.  Great Leaps data will be analyzed to ID trends LLI Program data will be analyzed to ID trends   Resiliency surveys will be administered to 4th and 5th grade students  ASPIRE Program Students Monthly October 2018-June 2019 October 2018 and June 2019 Administrators Guidance Counselors RTI Committee School Based Support Team SAPIS worker Parent Coordinator Teachers 5th Grade students 4th Grade students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Engagement workshops, self assessment and feedback surveys: Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers: monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Parent Coordinator -Guidance Counselor -Translation funds for materials and per session -SLT sub-committee work -Parent Engagement Calendar Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Administrators, Guidance Counselors and the Parent Coordinator will review OORS report data and parent feedback surveys to identify progress towards goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Results from Google Surveys, sign-in sheets, agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day One to One Pull Out Push In Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) NYS ELA Scores, Various in-house summative asssessments, MOSLAssessments, SchoolNet,Pre-referral forms, teacher recommendation, observations, parent request, PPTMeetings Mathematics NYS Math Scores, Various in-house summative asssessments,MOSLAssessments, SchoolNet,Pre-referral forms, teacher recommendation, Leveled Literacy Intervention SPIRE Great Leaps Fundations Close reading strategies Interactive Readings and Activities for skill reinforcement: -Imagine Learning -Starfall/Morestarfall -Brainpop/Brainpopjr Safari Montage -Scholastic: Bookflixand Trueflix Small group During the school day Algebra for All One to One Pull Out 2018-19 CEP 33 observations, parent request, PPTMeetings Interactive Programs/Activities: Push In Science NYS Science Scores, Various in-house summative asssessments,Pre-referral forms, teacher recommendation, observations, parent request, PPT Meetings -Prodigy Math -Brainpop/Brainpopjr -Safari Montage Leveled content text Student magazines (National Geographic, Scholastic News, Time for Kids) Interactive Programs/Activities: -Brainpop/Brainpopjr -Safari Montage Leveled content text (National Geographic, Scholastic News, Time for Kids) Interactive Programs/Activities: -Brainpop/Brainpopjr -Safari Montage Services provided by School Based Support Team Members using program related to area of need., including: Small group During the school day One to One Pull Out Push In Small group During the school day One to One Pull Out Push In Small group During the school day One to One Pull Out Push In Social Studies Various in-house summative assessments,Pre-referral forms, teacher recommendation, observations, parent request, PPTMeetings At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pre-referral forms, teacher recommendation, observations, parent request, OORSreports, PPT Meetings 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Skills Groups MentorProgram Social Groups Turn Taking skills Coping/self-regulating strategies Mood Meter 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance Support, SAPIS Support, Financial Assistance (school supplies, uniform), Social Worker Support, RTI Services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As a Title I school all teachers at P.S. 20 are fully licensed to teach the subject that they are assigned to teach. Instructional Leads / Liaisons attend Professional Development Individualized Professional Development Plan for all teachers  Mentoring Program   Consultants in Math and ELA  Cycles of teacher observations / Feedback Sessions   Classroom Inter-visitation  Common Planning periods with staff developers   Collaboration with H.R. liaison  Utilization of DOE Teacher Finder Tool   In-house professional development during grade and faculty conferences Interviewing and observing ATRs and substitute teachers for future vacancies / positions Supporting Paraprofessionals in becoming licensed teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff participates in ongoing professional development throughout the school year. During the 2018-2019 school year, full day professional development days will take place in September, November and June, as well as targeted and focused professional development sessions every Monday afternoon. All sessions will focus on the alignment of curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Framework for Teaching, with a specific focus on our 2018-2019Instructional Focus around assessment. There are four scheduled Pre-K non-attendance days, where both Pre-K teachers and paraprofessionals will attend together, in order to build a shared understanding for student expectations in meeting Common Core Learning Standards. All staff members will engage in data dives throughout the school year to identify trends and develop plans to address the individual and school-wide needs of our students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 38  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Kindergarten Orientation for Pre-Kindergarten parents Pre-Kindergarten parents receive information packets on how to assist their child in the transition to Kindergarten Pre-K teachers plan lessons in accordance with the Pre-K Common Core Learning Standards Parent Coordinator conducts parent involvement workshops Pre-K teachers attend city-wide professional development 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers make grade-level decisions on formative and summative assessments for each unit of study implemented. The School Leadership Team takes an active role in making decisions regarding school-wide assessments. Teachers attend data sessions to further their understanding of how to identify and address student needs. Teacher team meetings focus on the data that is discovered through looking at students work and teachers collaborate on what strategies to implement and approaches to take in addressing the identified needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 39  purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 704,374.00 91,065.00 57,934.00 23,118.00 7,149,456.00 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 40  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 20Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 20Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 20Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale - The ENL department analyzed NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, as well as NYS ELA data and utilized the EDAT tool to support the following program rationale. Based on NYSESLAT data, our direct English instruction will center around listening, speaking, and reading comprehension as well as foundational writing skills. The distinct role of the ENL/Bilingual teachers are to provide ENL strategies, materials, and ENL expertise to the classroom and to the content area teachers. ENL strategies will include scaffolding, differentiation, TPR, and vocabulary comprehension strategies such as the use of visuals, realia, and front loading vocabulary. Instruction will further be differentiated for SWD, newcomers, and long-term ELLs with individualized learning goals and differentiated instruction based on specific needs in each of the modalities: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. There are no SIFE students participating in the 2018-2019 program. In addition, assessments will be incorporated into every lesson to gauge student comprehension and understanding. Teachers will embed, The Writing Revolution Program by Judith Hochman, to incorporate writing strategies and learning goals into each thematic unit. Assessments will gauge student knowledge in identifying fragments vs. complete sentences, sentence types, sentence expansion, using conjunctions and subordinating conjunctions, and note taking and writing a paragraph outline for grades 3-5. Diagnostic assessments will be administered at the beginning, the middle, and at the end of the program. Students will be assessed on listening, reading, and writing with questions similar to the NYSESLAT and will receive a rubric-based score in each modality. Data gathered from the first two assessments (along with qualitative assessments) will be used to direct individual student learning objects. Data gathered from the final assessment will show student progress in listening, reading, and writing. Subgroups/Grade Levels - We will have 12 classes from grades 1 through 5, including students at Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ENL levels. In total, 6 classes will be taught by certified ENL/Bilingual teachers. And 6 content area teachers will share the expertise of 2 certified ENL/Bilingual teachers (1 certified ENL/Bilingual teacher paired to co-teach with 3 content area teachers on an evenly scheduled rotating basis). Schedule and Duration - Classes will be held after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 90 minutes from 2:30 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. from November, 2018 until April, 2019, for a total of approximately 30 sessions. Language of Instruction - English - Attendance is mandatory for all program sessions and attendance sheets are kept in the ENL coordinators office. All parent notifications will be reflective of the participants in the program and the parents preferred language choice. Number and types of certified teachers - 8 certified ENL teachers and 6 content area teachers. Types of materials - The materials purchased for the Title III program are supplemental and used solely for after-school purposes which include Learning A-Z and Imagine Learning Software Program, Treasure Chest for English Language Learners by Macmillan/McGraw Hill and The Writing Revolution Method, Strategies for Effective Writing Instruction by Judith C. Hochman. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale - All professional development sessions will be provided by the Administration and ENL department coordinators, and attended by all ENL/bilingual teachers as well as content area teachers. ENL/Bilingual teachers will be trained on connecting and incorporating ENL strategies (scaffolding, differentiation, visuals, TPR) to the specific topics and text used in the Title III Program curriculum. Content area teachers will receive training on the use of NYSESLAT materials, ENL testing strategies, implementation of the Treasure Chest reading series and The Writing Revolution method. Teachers to receive training - Lisa Barton, Judy Yung, Christina Tang, Jennifer Fitzgerald, Astrid Li, Alexa Lee, Nicholas Pei, Jessica Zarian, , Amy Schlossberg, Eileen Aherne, Scott Freiberger, Barbara Spencer, Yanling Gao and Min Chen. Schedule and duration - November, 2018, January, 2019 and March, 2019 (90 minute sessions) For our Title III program we have a PD day scheduled prior to the start of the program in November. This gives all teachers involved with the program an opportunity to review the materials and get hands on instruction as to implementing the materials. Lessons are incorporated with the materials to align with the four modalities of the NYSESLAT with a primary focus of writing. During this first PD session Title III class lists are given out and teachers have an opportunity to review their child’s NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT scores and current class progress. We also have a mid program PD session at which time teachers can communicate what progress has been made in their Title III classes as well as get instruction on the use of materials for more direct instruction around the readiness for the NYSESLAT. At the end of the program there is a final PD session where student work is assessed and analyzed as a group. Topics to be covered - 1) Implementing Treasure Chest for ELLs 2) Implementing The Writing Revolution Effective Writing Instruction method 3) Preparation and strategies for NYSESLAT 4) Imagine learning Software Name of provider - P.S. 20 ENL Department Coordinators and Administration Attendance is mandatory for the PD sessions; records of the PD agendas, and attendance sheets are kept in the ENL coordinators office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Rationale - Parents/Guardians are arguably the most important stakeholders in a child's educational success. When schools, families, and community groups work together to support learning, students achieve better results. Parent engagement at P.S. 20 is defined as parents and school staff working together to support and improve the learning, development, and health of children. We believe that parent engagement is a shared responsibility in which the school, the community and organizations are committed to engaging parents in meaningful ways, and parents are committed to actively supporting their children's learning and development. Schedule and duration - Two 90 minute (January, 2019 and March, 2019) and one 120 minute (February 2019) parent engagement workshop Topics to be covered - ESSA, Parents rights, Title III Program, NYSESLAT, Treasure Chest for ELLs, The Writing Revolution Method and Imagine Learning, as well as Learning A-Z software program. Name of provider - These services are provided but not limited to the following: P.S. 20 Administration, Staff, PTA and ENL Department. All of our parent workshops are offered in multiple languages with the assistance of in-house translators, as well as translation headsets that parents can wear to achieve greater clarity. These services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in our school. How parents will be notified - Parents will be invited with a written invitation in their home language(s.) The languages were reflective of the participants in the program and the parents preferred language choice, as well as our school website, PTA bulletin board and ENL bulletin board. Copies of the invitations, comprehensive agendas and attendance sheets for parent participation in all events will be housed in the ENL coordinators office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name John Bowne Elementary School Borough Queens School Number 020 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Victoria Rice Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mindy Chen Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Pei/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Barton/ENL Related-Service Provider J. Carroll Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal C. DiBello, J. Eagen, P. Foy, Coach type here School Counselor B. Littman, Parent Glenda Gonzalez Parent Coordinator M. Lizcano Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 9 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1383 2018-19 CEP 54 Total number of ELLs 454 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.83%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese (Mandarin) If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese (Mandarin) Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1999 2017-2018 2017-2018 2018-2019 K 1 2 2 3 2 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 2 2 2 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools currently used are Fountas & Pinnell, National Geographic: Reach For Reading, Expeditionary Learning, Measures of Student Learning NYC Benchmark and NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The insights the data provides is valuable evidence of our students' performance. We also use the NYS ELA exam results as a guide to instruction. Classroom teachers as well as ENL teachers use their own formative and summative exams to guide their personal classroom instruction. This data helps to drive teacher instruction focused on the effectiveness of grouping for differentiated instruction. The insights provided by the data are that our students tend to stall at the expanding level of the NYSESLAT and that all students need more formal writing instruction. Instructional planning is also guided by the EDAT tool through ATS. 2018-19 CEP 55  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Meet, implement, evaluate, modify. ENL teachers meet with classroom teachers regularly to monitor student progress and create co-teaching lesson planning. In addition, the ENL department meets regularly to discuss student progress via data-driven instruction and change ENL programming as needed to better serve students. School initiatives such as new reading and writing materials National Geographic and Passport curriculum and school wide implementation of The Writing Revolution Method have helped to support our students. Administration monitors planning, assessments, and program implementation. To help support instructional planning efforts, the school has added weekly collaborative inquiry sessions around student work on all grades. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We analyze the overall results and make decisions for our program. We analyze the specific results of the different modalities and make decisions for differentiation and Title III programming. This approach helped us achieve AYP. The assessment tools currently used are Fountas & Pinnell, National Geographic: Reach For Reading, The Writing Revolution assessments, Measures of Student Learning NYC Benchmark and NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Identified areas of need are to better support Expanding-level students with writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We analyze the results from our state assessments and form appropriate Response to Intervention (RTI) groups. We use the data to help form our Title III After-school Programs. Our Title III program is structured on the common needs of different ENL groups. Data is also used to see if an evaluation is needed for a child to be referred to our SETSS program. Summative data is also used to create small group instruction within the classroom for specific learning objectives. It is also used to monitor and guide formative assessments as well as help in the creation of our Title III program. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 20Q formulates its RTI groups primarily by assessing the data from the spring exams NYS ELA,and Math, as well as the NYSESLAT. Teacher input, based on classroom formative and summative assessments is also part of the prerequisite for the RTI referral. Our curriculum materials this year, specifically Go Math, also has built-in RTI on-the-spot interventions for each lesson. The data provided helps teachers use assessment results and student work products to guide instruction, identify areas for improvement, and address the specific needs of students with learning disabilities. RTI groups are formulated by the specific needs and interventions needed by students and done in cycles. The RTI framework is organized by the school's School Based Support Team. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The patterns revealed across proficiency levels and grades on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are deficiencies in writing skills. The majority of our ELLs scored in the Expanding and Commanding proficiency levels. By using the test scores of the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT as well as the RLAT and EDAT tools we formulate our classes, design our instruction and refer to our Title III After school programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The administration and the school ENL department work collaboratively when the NYSESLAT results come in. Our first step is to determine progressions as well as deficiencies. We then formulate classes based on language proficiency levels as well as students' specific learning needs within those levels. Without question, our staff always adheres to CR Part 154.2 with all aspects of our curricular and class formulation planning. ATS data, such as the RLAT and EDAT, are made available from the ENL team to the classroom teachers regarding student growth. Copies of their NYSESLAT scores broken down by modalities are given to the teachers as well as the parents. The teachers also receive workshops given by the ENL team on the RLAT and EDAT; what the data shows and how to interpret it. The process of disseminating the information starts with the ENL entitlement and continued entitlement letters and then we inform teachers and parents from there about their child's specific language aptitude. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. (a) The organizational models at P.S. 20Q are the Push-In (Co-Teaching) model for our transitional and expanding proficiency level students are taught by a Common Branch Teacher as well as a licensed ENL Teacher. These classes were formulated to facilitate the Push-In (Co-Teaching) model with regard to the appropriate minutes of ENL/ELA instruction as per CR Part 154.2. The instruction is given for 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes or stand-alone integrated ENL to our transitioning students. The expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction.The Pull-Out Program is in conjunction with the push-in model of some transitional and expanding students to address the needs of those ENLs that require more ENL stand-alone minutes. Our concentrated classes address the needs of our entering and emerging ENLs and are taught by a dual-licensed ENL/Common Branch teacher. All of our ENL students are grouped according to their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Our commanding and proficient students are taught by a push-In model with a Common Branch Teacher as well as an ENL teacher. This allows for the 90-minute integrated ENL/ELA or other content area requirement. The stand-alone model is implemented by pulling out students to a small group setting for Entering and Emerging-level students for at least 180 minutes per week. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Bilingual classes address the needs indicated by the Parent Survey and Program Selection forms. The bilingual licensed teacher set up there day to fulfill all requirements of the ENL blocks, ELA blocks, and 60 minutes of Chinese Native Language Arts (NLA). The students in the TBE program are grouped by Entering or Emerging proficiency levels, with Chinese Mandarin as their home language. c. DL program. If applicable. In our new Dual Language (DL) program, there are two classes in kindergarten, two classes in 1st grade and two classes in second grade. In each class, approximately 50% of students are non-ELLs (English proficient) and 50% are ELLs with Chinese as their home language. Students receive instruction in English one day and in Chinese (Mandarin) the next school day. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels in each of our program models. Our students are generally grouped homogeneously to ensure that the mandated number of units are met. In our push-in models, the commanding and proficient students are serviced 90 minutes per week in a co-teaching model by an ENL licensed teacher as well as a Common Branch ELA teacher. Our expanding and transitional students are serviced in the same manner in a co-teaching model with an ELA teacher as well as a ENL teacher. All of our entering and emerging students in grades 1, 2, 3 and 5 are in our self-contained ENL classes serviced by a dual-licensed ENL/common branch teacher. Our 4 th grade entering and emerging students are in a push-in model serviced 360 minutes with a co-teaching model with an ENL teacher as well as a Common Branch teacher. Our entering and emerging Chinese kindergarten students are serviced by teachers with bilingual licenses. Our other entering and emerging ENL students are 2018-19 CEP 57  serviced by a co-teaching push in model, with a ENL teacher as well as Common Branch teacher. At least one instructional period is dedicated to HLA each day for the TBE/DL classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL Specialists deliver content area instruction during the mandated time of service. We are currently using MacMillian's Treasure Chest for English Language Learners in grades 1-5. The program is concentrated in Social Studies and Science, while providing differentiated instruction addressing all language acquisition levels from entering all the way to commanding. The scaffolded lessons provide instruction and application for specific language-acquisition strategies and reading skills. The skills addressed are oral language, vocabulary, and vocabulary strategies, phonemic awareness and phonics, language structure, comprehension strategies and skills, writing, and language objectives aligned with TESOL and Common Core Standards. For grades K-2, we are now integrating National Geographic for use in our curriculum. In addition, grades 3-5 utilize Pearson's Expeditionary Learning. We are also still using Rigby Balanced Literacy Program, On Our Way To English in our kindergarten classes and some 1st and 2nd grade classes. This program's concentration is in Social Studies, Science, and Mathematics. In our Push In Co-Teaching models, the ENL Pedagogue works along with the classroom teacher to scaffold lessons from Expeditionary Learning and National Geographic: Reach For Reading, making the content of the lessons more accessible to the ENL students. Across grades we utilize the Hochman Writing Revolution Program which targets grammatical writing skills and helps to expand student writing abilities. Every lesson includes/connects with at least one NYS Learning Standard for ELA and Math. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ENLs in Bilingual Classes were informally assessed to determine their strengths in their native language, since a Chinese LAB is not provided. As our goal is to transition them to become proficient in English, our assessments are predominantly administered in English, with the teachers guidance in the Native Language. The Bilingual teachers assess the students using Fountas & Pinnell, running records, end-of-unit assessments in Math, Task Performance in Reading and Math following CCLS, individual conferencing, small group instruction, and guided reading groups. Our Hispanic students were given the Spanish LAB to determine their language dominance. This year the student assessments included the Measures of Student Learning NYC Benchmark assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (a) We currently do not have SIFE students. (b) We are currently servicing our newcomers using our concentrated class or a Push-In (Co-Teaching) model. These students are grouped specifically to address language acquisition in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Our ENL Specialists work collaboratively with the classroom teacher to address the needs of the class as a whole and focus' in on specific individual needs as well. Theater Arts Clusters push in to the class, instruction is focused on language and expression. Some students also work with a Literacy Paraprofessional, Learning Leaders and Student Teachers, in a small group setting or one to one. Our teachers attend Staff Development Workshops focused on teaching our ENLs higher academic language. These strategies are designed to improve reading and writing. Brain-Pop for ENL is another program currently used. It provides the students with phonemic awareness and reading skills. The use of the Smart Board has also been an invaluable tool for our ENLs. (c) Our ENLs who have been here 4 to 6 years receive services via a Push-In (Co-Teaching) model or pull out model. Our ENL Specialist pushes into the classroom for the appropriate number of minutes dependent upon the ENLs' proficiency level. Using ENL methodology they address the specific needs of the students, while aligning instruction to the Common Core learning Standards and working collaboratively with the Co-Teacher. Theater Arts Clusters push into the class instructing the students in language and expression. Students also work with a Literacy Paraprofessional, Learning Leaders, and Student Teachers in a small group setting or one to one. As mentioned before, our teachers attend Staff Development Workshops and 2018-19 CEP 58  use the Smart Board to enhance their lessons. Many of these students are encouraged to take part in our Title III program to reinforce their comprehension and writing skills. The program is designed to better prepare them for the ELA and NYSESLAT exams. (d) We currently have one (1) long -term ELL. The child is in an ICT class and is in a pull-out model for ENL instruction. The ENL specialist works in a small group to enhance this students specific language needs. ENL scaffolds are created to help the child comprehend the context-embedded vocabulary as well as complete well written compositions that meet the demand of the Common Core Learning Standard for 5th Grade as well as the ENL Standards. (e) The plan for our former ENLs is their inclusion in our Advanced ENL Concentration classes. These classes are made up of Commanding-level and non-ELL students. An ENL teacher pushes in at least 90 minutes per week to continue with ELL support and strategies. They are also given extended time on state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL specialists work closely with classroom teachers to provide ENL strategies and scaffolds to make Expeditionary Learning and National Geographic Reach for Reading more accessible for ELL students. The series Treasure Chest for English Language Learners is continuing to work beautifully with our ELL-SWDs. The programs are rich in higher-level academic vocabulary, with a focus on non-fiction text, and is structured towards individual instruction addressing all the language acquisition levels. Instructional strategies used specifically to support ELL-SWDs are RTI, SETSS, OT, The Writing Revolution (TWR-Hochman), Cucciara method for writing and reading. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Every grade has ELA and Math Curriculum Maps, which have designated sections addressing the unique needs of our diverse ELL-SWD student population. We mainstream for content area instruction in a least restrictive environment. All grades have 12-1-1 and ICT classes to meet IEP goals. ENL teachers push-in and pull-out ELL-SWDs to meet mandated ELL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our content area instruction is primarily taught in the native language by the Chinese Bilingual Specialist in our two Bilingual classes. P.S. 20Q offers support for our transitional ENLs by giving them time-and-a-half extension on all State Exams. Some of these students must also attend Extended Day. We also offer a Test Preparation Night, which is a workshop for students and their parents. The parents are instructed in a variety of ways in which they can better prepare their children for the impending New York State Exams. These workshops are given and translated in the rich variety of languages we house in our school. Students are provided additional support by our Learning Leaders and Student Teachers. The focus of our school is to foster higher cognitive thinking processes and always encourage conversational discourse comprised of higher academic language. The school offers to Title III After-school program cycles. Cycle I focuses on Entering and Emerging-level students from October-December to support decoding and initial English acquisition skills. Cycle II runs from January-March for Transitioning and Expanding-level students and focuses on reading and writing support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, we have a variety of new programs focused on reading and writing. Across grades we are now utilizing The Hochman Writing Revolution program, whose main focus are writing skills and grammar. We also embed the grammar skills learned in Pearson's Ready Gen and Expeditionary Learning programs. This enables our students to complete academic tasks utilizing more focused sentence structures. In grades K-2, the literacy program is "National Geographic: Reach for Reading," and in grades 3-5 it is Expeditionary Learning. The upper-grade teachers are receiving professional training with Ms. Cucchiara and Lilly Wong Fillmore so that we can improve our students' vocabulary acquisition, sentence building, and sentence expansion. The entire school is using the math program Go Math. This year we have also introduced the Algebra for All Program to our fifth graders. 2018-19 CEP 59  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ENLs at P.S. 20 are afforded equal access to all our programs (athletic, academic, arts), which include The Basketball Team, Cheering Squad, Chess Club, Chorus, Band, Ping Pong Club, T-Ball, Soccer, The Gardening Club, Math Club, Book Club and Drama Club. Letters are sent home to the parents of all our students, including all our ELLS in their native languages. Parental decision determines a students' participation in one or more of our activities. Some of the sports activities require try-outs. All of these activities encourage the acquisition of and promote proficiency in the English language. The Title III After-school program focus on reading and writing support for students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Hochman Writing Revolution is an instructional writing pattern that helps all our ENLs acquire needed writing skills. The Treasure Chest for English Language Learners has turned out to be a wonderful reading program for our ENLs and ELLs-SWDs. As mentioned earlier, this differentiated program addresses all the individual needs of our students. Rigby's "On Our Way To English" has proven to be quite effective in Kindergarten and first grade. It exposes the students to rich academic vocabulary through literacy and songs. Brain-Pop for ENL (videos connected to the curriculum) is a program designed to help our ENLs acquire higher academic language through visual learning modalities. We will continue to use the Empire State NYSESLAT Test Prep Books by Continental Press for our ENLs receiving services. These books help to give our ENLs some insight to the structure of the NYSESLAT State exam. We have purchased The Oxford Kids Dictionary across grades to target our large population of entering and emerging students. They will be used alongside student books that will enrich our students knowledge of academic vocabulary in many different topics related to the curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards. Other leveled readers have been purchased in order to provide sufficient reading material for our students at all reading levels. Videos that are part of the "National Geographic: Reach For Reading" and Expeditionary Learning Programs are used as a support. All classrooms utilize a Smartboard or Elmo document camera as well as computer technology. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed through the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT for the DL, TBE and ENL programs. Our Kindergarten Chinese Bilingual classes are instructed for at least 60 minutes per day in their native language. Instruction is given by licensed Bilingual Teachers. Native language books have been purchased for all our classrooms, as well as our school library. NLA are are embedded in the content areas of social studies and science. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Following the Core Curriculum ensures that required services support, and resources correspond, to our ENLs ages, and grade levels. Each grade uses the appropriate texts in the Content Areas for every level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Hochman Writing Revolution is an instructional writing pattern that helps all our ELLs acquire needed writing skills. The Treasure Chest for English Language Learners has turned out to be a wonderful reading program for our ELLs and ELLs-SWDs. As mentioned earlier, this differentiated program addresses all the individual needs of our students. Rigby's "On Our Way To English" has proven to be quite effective in Kindergarten and 1st grade. It exposes the students to rich academic vocabulary through literacy and songs. Brain-Pop for ESL (videos connected to the curriculum) is a program designed to help our ELLs acquire higher academic language through visual learning modalities. We will continue to use the Empire State NYSESLAT Test Prep Books by Continental Press for our ELLs receiving services. These books help to give our ELLs some insight to the structure of the NYSESLAT State exam. We have purchased The Oxford Kids Dictionary across grades to target our large population of entering and emerging students. They will be used along side student books that will enrich our students knowledge of academic vocabulary in many different topics related to the curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards. Other leveled readers have been purchased in order to provide sufficient reading material for our students at all reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 60  Videos that are part of the ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning Programs are used as a support. All classrooms utilize a Smartboard or Elmo document camera as well as computer technology. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent Coordinator supports parents and their children through organizing an Adult ENL program and holds PTA meetings to inform parents of school activities. One of the activities offered to our newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year is the Kindergarten Tea. This is a presentation describing the programs available at the school. With the assistance of translators, the parents are able to understand and have the ability to ask any questions they might have. Materials are given out, such as story books to prepare the newly-enrolled students in making an easy transition for the following school year. The ENL department also holds a Parent Orientation in the beginning of the school year, in which all our programs are described to the parents and students. We take this opportunity to show the Chancellor's DVD in all the languages available. This is done in case there are any parents who did not get to see the video at the time of registration. A question-and-answer time is allotted to ensure the proper assimilation of the information given. As per the new chancellor regulations, we have an informal introductory evening in early September where parents can meet with their child's ENL specialist in order to become better informed about their child's ENL curriculum. The school counselor holds school-wide assemblies to focus on the social-emotional needs of our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Side by Side - EP/ELL are integrated for the full day with a class split of 50% EP and 50% ELL Chinese and English. Full Day instruction in English and next day in Chinese. Alternating days of English and Chinese. Emergent literacy is taught sequentially. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At PS 20Q we have on going Staff Development throughout the school year. We have Grade Conferences and weekly professional development given by the administration, invited guests, as well as turn keyed by other staff members. Two days in September and Election Day, Brooklyn-Queens Day, and two Supplementary Professional Development days have been added to our calendar for Professional Learning. We also have Monthly ELL Liaison Meetings. All ENL teachers have the opportunity to attend out of school workshops and TESOL Conferences, and then turn-key to the rest of the ENL Department. This helps fulfill the ENL teachers requirement of 75% of their PD being ELL related and 15% for other teaching staff. The secretaries also play an integral part in the ELL identification process and receive professional development in proper coding and individual student descriptors for ENL students. The staff as a whole is encouraged to attend a variety of workshops in all subject areas, behavioral modification, academic questioning, academic conversations, teaching ELL students and their entry 2018-19 CEP 61  points, hands on work projects, inclusion of students, as well as workshops in the arts and physical education fields. There are on-going staff development opportunities throughout the school year. The district office offers workshops to teachers of ENLs on a regular basis that can be attended with permission. On the NYC DOE website there are different webinars that can be logged onto and listened to. Different organizations as well as TESOL offer various workshops during the school year. Most of these all have to do with strategies to make the Common Core Learning Standards accessible to our Ell's. Teachers who attend various workshops turn-key the information to the rest of the ENL Department as well as other staff members. The staff is encouraged to attend a variety of workshops in all subject areas, behavioral modification, academic questioning, academic conversations, teaching ELL students and their entry points, hands on work projects, inclusion of students, as well as workshops in the arts and physical education fields. All of these workshops enable the teachers to find scaffolds and strategies that help all our students achieve success with the common core. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. (a) We support our staff in assisting our ENLs as they transition from elementary to middle school by providing workshops to our ENLs and their parents, providing necessary information which will enable them to make an educated decision. (b) A catalogue containing all the dates of the Middle School Open House is provided to encourage our students and parents to attend. (c) Our Guidance Dept. will also make individual appointments with students and their parents to address any concerns. (d) We hold special assemblies showcasing speakers from many of the Middle Schools. This is a perfect time for students to ask questions. (e) The ELL students are taken to the Middle Schools to see a typical day and how the change of periods take place. (f) The Guidance Dept. conduct mini- workshops, going into each classroom explaining the process of transition to the Middle Schools. The minimum 15% of total PD hours of ELL training for all staff is addressed during our monthly Grade Conferences, Election Day workshops, Brooklyn-Queens Day, and during our Teacher Team Meetings held every Monday afternoon. Our ENL/Bilingual Teachers utilize the Queens North ELL PD calendar to enroll in workshops that are pertinent to their case loads. The NYC DOE Department of ELLs also holds workshops that ENL/Bilingual staff can attend. The teacher and department log their hours onto a PD workshop Log to keep track of the amount of hours they have attended. Further professional development is provided when teachers turnkey the new information they have learned to other staff members. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All ENL teachers are provided with spread sheets in September with their individual student case loads. They are required as per CR Part 154 to be responsible to meet individually with all of their students parents at least once throughout the school year. The designated Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time is used for this purpose. If that time is not convenient parents will be met during a teachers prep time or before or after school. During these meetings we discuss targeted areas of need, based on assessments in the ready Gen and expeditionary Learning units as well as other class assessments such as Fountas and Pinnell and other formative and summative assessments. regular conferencing with co teachers provides other input for these meetings. NYS ELA, MATH,Science and NYSESLAT data sheets are also analyzed to enable us to target our diverse English Language Learning population. Translators are available through our after school program (CPC) housed here at our school or arranged by our parent coordinator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent involvement events are usually done early in the morning right after families drop off their children. Our monthly “Family Involvement” breakfast is offered to all our families that attend. We also have a monthly Parent Teacher Association 2018-19 CEP 62  meeting where parents receive important school information from the parents and the principal. For our ELL parents, all fliers are translated and given out in our main languages, Spanish and Chinese. Families also receive automated phone calls in their language about any upcoming parent involvement events and PTA meetings. We provide translation during the parent involvement events and at the PTA meetings. Translators are available through our after school program (CPC) housed here at our school or arranged by our parent coordinator. We have parent volunteers in all of our dual language and TBE classes. Parents participate in the PTA and on the School Leadership Team. Parents attend Adult ENL programs offered in the school. Parents also support our school store and the S.C.O.R.E pledge for student behavioral management. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victoria Rice, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John Bowne School DBN: 25Q020 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Victoria Hart Title Principal Patrick Foy Assistant Principal Monique Lizcano Parent Coordinator M Chen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Glenda Gonzalez Parent Nicholas Pei/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Barton /ENL Teacher/Subject Area Yazmin Torres Coach Coach Bonnie Littman School Counselor Danielle Dimango Michael Dantona Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 1/1/01 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q020 School Name: John Bowne Superintendent: Danielle DiMang The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Monique Lizcano Parent Coordinator TBD Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S. 20 Q during the registration process parents are interviewed. During that time parents are asked what language they prefer to receive notices in. Report cards, notices, progress reports, etc. are sent in the language of preference. In addition, parents fill out a Blue Emergency Card which depicts language of preference as well. P.S. 20 provides written translation of all school originated parental notices seven to ten days in advance. We use the School Messenger telephone service for “Announcement of Special Activities and Emergencies,” which is individualized for each family to receive messages in their native language, and provide written translation in all languages spoken among the PS 20 families and stakeholders. At PTA, Parental Involvement, and Parent Teacher Conferences, written translation (where applicable) is provided by school staff and DOE translation services, as well as written translation provided by the Community Based Organizations working within our building. Parental Survey selection sheets are utilized. This information is reported to the school community through school leadership team meetings, PTA nights and ENL orientations that take place during the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Spanish Bengali Urdu Korean Arabic French English Chinese Spanish Bengali Urdu Korean Arabic French 100 English Chinese Spanish Bengali Urdu Korean Arabic French 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Letters Daily, weekly, monthly ENL newsletters Created and disseminated by the ENL Department Quarterly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation (where applicable) is provided by school staff and DOE translation services, as well as written translation provided by the Community Based Organizations working within our building. Translated by school staff and Community Based Organizations working within our building. 2018-19 CEP 67  State testing dates Chancellors Regulation Updates Discipline Code State testing dates are disseminated 2-3 times per year Chancellors Regulations are disseminated as needed State testing documents are planned for in advance and DOE translation services are used to ensure correct translation and timely dissemination Chancellors regulations are translated by the DOE translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher Conferences are held according to the DOE school calendar. Parent-Teacher Nights in September, November, March and May Back to school Week. Back to School Week Parent In September a new ENL student/Parent orientation is held. Interpretation is provided by school staff and Community Based Organizations working within our building. New ENL Parent Orientation Parent Engagement Tuesdays Every Tuesday afternoon during Parent Engagement there are various parent events that happen during the school year NYSESLAT NIGHT One night in February NYS ELA Parents as Partners NYS Math Parents as Partners Several nights in February Interpretation is provided by school staff and Community Based Organizations working within our building. Interpretation is provided by school staff and Community Based Organizations working within our building. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 68  In the event of an emergency the school would use the School Messenger telephone service and Community Based Organizations working within our building. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Parent coordinator as well as other key school staff has training on fulfilling all language access requirements according to the Chancellors Regulation A-663 and monitors ATS. The school staff is aware of the primary languages spoken in our school, the translation services available through the DOE as well as the School Messenger and our Community Based Organizations working within our building. The staff is also aware of the guidelines pertaining to the use and age of private family and friend translators. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As previously noted, P.S. 20 will provide special announcements over the telephone in the native languages. The monthly parent meetings have oral translation during the presentations done by P.S. 20 staff members and parent volunteers. P.S. 20 provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. This document includes their rights regarding Translation and Interpretation services. Additionally, P.S. 20 makes use of Regional and City-wide translated material when provided. Written communication has been translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit when applicable. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys during parent teacher conferences Exit slips after monthly parent engagement workshops PTA and Parent Coordinator feedback to Principal 2018-19 CEP 69 
