2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q024 School Name: P.S. 024 ANDREW JACKSON Principal: DEBRA CASSIDY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 24 Queens, Andrew Jackson School 342500010024 K-5 45-57 Union Street, Flushing, N.Y. 11355 School Number (DBN): 25Q024 718-359-2288 Phone Number: 718-460-3251 Fax: BaniSingh BSingh7@Schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Debra Cassidy Michelle Wahlig Lavanya Matcha EngiIbrahim Not Applicable Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not Applicable District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, N.Y. 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDimang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, N.Y. 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debra Cassidy Michelle Wahlig Lavanya Matcha CathyIacovano N/A N/A N/A N/A Tracy Harrison Dana Wershaw *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EngiIbrahim Sheuly Mazumder BhavaniJannu BabitaDixit Birva Patel Fatima Kalim Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 24Q prides itself on excellence. Our mission statement is to work collaboratively with the staff and parents of PS 24Q, as partners, in setting high standards of excellence for our students. Our expectations are that students will realize superior academic achievement and social development as they become productive members of our local community and global society. We educate all members of the school community, students, staff and parents in a wholesome, nurturing environment. The knowledge and skills students gain in our school will empower them to become lifelong learners, risk takers, and problem solvers as they face life’s challenges. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 24 has established many strategic collaborations/partnerships in order to support student learning and teacher practice, such as professional learning with Maryann Cucchiara, a literacy consultant specializing in rigorous instruction for English Language Learners, Teacher's College and CCNY's Math-in-The City. Staff developers support our teachers in designing and implementing rigorous instruction and tasks that are aligned to student individual goals to reach and surpass their grade's common core standards in all content areas. In addition, our school has partnered with outside consultants in the arts and in physical education, as we believe that students' development in these areas are essential in supporting our students to reach their potential both academically and emotionally. Our collaborations include:  Brooklyn Conservatory of Music - strings music instruction for all of our 4th and 5th Graders; recorder for select 3rd Graders Swim for Life – 2nd Grade  Chorus – 4th and 5th Grades  Basketball and Cheerleading Teams   K-5 CookShop  Elders Share the Arts (ESTA)  K-5 Move to Improve  Math in the City (MiTC) Together, the administration, staff and parents have developed a strong partnership between home and school to support the academic progress of students. We plan collaboratively with our School Leadership Team to set goals for our educational programs, and work together to obtain these goals. Many opportunities are available for parents to attend academic workshops, which help strengthen the meaningful home-school partnership at PS 24. Our full-time and part-time guidance counselors and SAPIS worker tailor lessons to students' needs to develop behaviors and habits of mind needed to be successful. We at PS 24Q are committed to bring learning into the 21st century by giving students access to the tools they will use in today’s evolving society. At this juncture, all students in grades 3 through 5 have access to individual laptops. Our kindergarten, first, and second graders utilize individual iPads throughout the school day. New Promethean Boards have been installed in several rooms across the building, and programs and applications are routinely updated by our on-staff technology specialist and our STEM teachers. To differentiate learning for individual students, we have invested in a variety of online programs and applications such as Google Classroom, Benchmark Universe, The Learning Odyssey for all students, Compass Learning, Epic!, and Wixie.com for our K through 2 students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. To reach our special student populations such as our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, we utilize multiple points of entry to ensure that lessons are differentiated to enable all students to produce meaningful work products. In order to ensure the Common Core Learning Standards are infused throughout all lessons, curriculum mapping and planning are done with staff developers both in and out of the building (Teacher's College, Math in the City, Algebra for All, Maryann Cucchiara, an ENL specialist). To focus on college readiness, curriculum has been aligned across grade levels and subject areas through inter-visitations, professional learning, common preps, and vertical planning with teacher leaders. Professional learning and Professional Collaboration time is used for for inquiry and to analyze student work to drive future instruction. School and grade-wide assessments, rubrics, and student-friendly checklists were created as tools for teachers to use when planning lessons. Teachers use a variety of formative assessments to monitor student understanding during lessons. Data from all of these assessments, in 2018-19 CEP 10  conjunction with summative assessment data, enables teachers to modify their teaching to accommodate student needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Elements of the Framework for Great Schools where our school has made the most progress over the past year are:  Strong Family-Community Ties that ensure that our school is a welcoming environment for our families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school.  Trust that creates a school culture where all members value and respect one another's contributions. Because trust is established, true collaboration occurs and student achievement continues to rise. This past school year served as an opportunity to bring the RULER program supported by the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence into our building. The two-day institute at Yale University was attended by administration, the UFT representative, and IEP teacher. Together they formed an SEL committee who turnkeyed information of the evidence-based approach for social and emotional learning. The intention of RULER is to help students, educators, and families develop the emotional intelligence skills needed to make sound decisions, foster healthy relationships, enhance well-being, and achieve desired outcomes at school, home, and in the workplace. In addition to providing support for our faculty to understand the Anchors of Emotional Intelligence, we supported healthy interactions between parents and their children through workshops presented by "Circle of Security." These trainings focused on early intervention models to increase attachment and security amongst parents and their children. As the community around our building continues to diversify, we wanted to support the new members of our community and therefore created a series of workshops to support these families. "New Families," workshops were held monthly and covered a range of academic and social topics including parenting skills, getting active, helping students in reading and writing, helping students in math, Thinking Maps training and online resources to use with students at home and during summer. As a result, the School Survey reveals that 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. Similarly, 98% of families say that they feel respected by their child's principal, and 98% of families say that they trust the principal. The Survey also revealed that 86% of teachers say that it's okay in their school to discuss feelings, worries, and frustrations with other teachers. The key areas of focus for this school year will be continuing to ensure the growth of Trust amongst all stakeholders, as well as nourishing Strong Family-Community Ties, and are tied to our Instructional Focus: Our Students (Continue to) Make G.A.I.N.S.! Getting stronger through Actionable feedback and Standard-aligned Instruction that Nurtures learners’ Social Emotional needs. 2018-19 CEP 11  A critical element embedded in our Action Plan is to continue building trust between staff and administration and among all stakeholders in our community. We plan to accomplish this goal by:  Articulating clear expectations on planning and implementing rigorous lessons and tasks in all subject areas  Examining the eight components of the Danielson Framework and providing examples of effective and highly effective practice within our school setting  Planning for sustained and coherent professional learning around the Instructional Focus, including feedback practices and aligning assessment to instructional goals Teachers will plan for differentiation to address the needs of all learners including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. They will design instruction, participate in inter-visitations to share best practices, communicate actionable feedback, support specific individual needs – including the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, and continue to develop collegial relationships among pedagogues across grade levels. We will expand our opportunities to engage parents in order to improve our home-school connection to support all students. Our goal is for all students to develop self and social awareness and engage in responsible decision making in order to self-manage their academic progress and behavior. At PS 24Q, school leaders, staff and parents recognize that high expectations for student achievement are critical to prepare students for college and career. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q024 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 992 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 45 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 4 24 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 67.3% % Reduced Lunch 39.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 10.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 66.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 68 65 5 96.8% 1.8% 11.8% 2.2% 85.6% 1.1% 8 0% 7.6 78.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths This past school year, the Instructional Cabinet participated in Supervisory Inquiry to study the impact of RTI strategies on our students in need of Tier 2 interventions. The screening process of the researched-based Reading Recovery program, led by our Reading Recovery Teacher, was utilized to identify students whose academic achievement may need further monitoring, and to provide effective interventions for those who need them. Of the eight students, seven students were discontinued. All participating students grew seven to nine independent reading levels within their Reading Recovery cycle. In order to extend the impact of this intensive program, we have used funds toward the hiring of a second Reading Recovery teacher who is currently undergoing extensive training for this role this summer. In addition to the results of the Reading Recovery program, we analyzed the impacts of The Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System (LLI) on a small-scale to test the impact of the program. The LLI System was provided as an intensive supplementary literacy Tier 3 intervention for male students primarily of Hispanic and African American heritage. Students within this group had made limited growth from the prior school year in their independent reading levels. The Wilson Assessment of Decoding and Encoding (WADE) in conjunction with the Pearson Reading-Level Indicator were used to monitor progress for the students. Between January to May, students, on average, moved up four independent reading levels (as measured by TCRWP running records). The impact of RTI strategies will be the focus of our Instructional Cabinet and Administrative Team inquiry for the upcoming school year. Priority Needs Our 2017-2018 NYS ELA and Math data reveals an increased need to address the growing gap between our Students With Disabilities and General Education Students. While close analysis of student cohorts indicates a growing number of Level 4 students in the 2018 cohort, namely 33.3% to 39% in ELA, and 38.4% to 57.5% in Math, conversely the number of Level 1 students in the 2018 cohort increased by 7.8% from 10.1% to 17.9% in ELA and 5.3% to 7.5% in math. Overall, our ELA mean proficiency for our overall lowest third is 2.59 and 2.16 for our Students with Disabilities. Our overall ELA mean proficiency is a stark contrast- 3.23. Similarly, our Math mean proficiency for our overall lowest third is 2.88, 2.31 for our Students with Disabilities, and 3.54 for the school overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 14  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have incorporated specially designed instruction and RTI strategies in ELA and Mathematics for their lowest third students, resulting in a 5% decrease of Level 1 students in the 2019, 2020, and 2021 student cohorts. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All classroom teachers All classroom teachers; IEP/SETTS teacher; Special Education liaison Daily implementation; PL cycle begins on October 29 through November 12, 2018  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All classroom teachers will provide Tier I (and Tier II strategies when applicable). Teachers will be a part of a cycle of professional learning on RTI presented by the IEP/SETTS teacher and Special Education liaison (Assistant Principal). Teachers utilize their Tuesday Parent Engagement time to meet with parents of students who are receiving Tier I and Tier II interventions. Teachers maintain logs of parent interaction. Teachers may utilize their sixth period prep to discuss RTI strategies with SBST members or literacy/math coaches. After school programs (extended day) will be budgeted for in order to provide intensive support to the lowest third students. Students will receive both math and literacy instruction geared toward their independent readiness level (rather than grade assignment) that will be informed by our universal screener- STARS assessment. The administration will progress monitor student achievement through the analysis of STARS assessment data throughout the program. The Morning Shine program will be budgeted for students identified as “high 2s and low 3s” in order to provide intensive support. Students will receive both math and literacy instruction that will be informed by our universal screener- STARS assessment. The administration will progress monitor student achievement through the analysis of STARS assessment data throughout the program. Lowest third in grades 3, 4, and 5 Tuesdays and Thursdays; 2:40-4:10 pm Starting October 24, 2018-April 18, 2019 High 2s and Low 3s in grades 3-5 Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; 7:10-8:00 am Tuesdays and Thursdays; 2:40-4:10 pm Starting October 22, 2018-April 18, 2019 Fall Date: TBD and Spring Date: TBD Data specialist will provide support with STARS; Administration; select teachers and support staff Data specialist will provide support with STARS; Administration; select teachers and support staff TC Staff Developers; outside ENL consultant; F-Status support staff; Administration Team Extra support through a push-in and pull-out model is being provided to students by F-status support staff, in-house coaches, the SETSS/IEP teacher, and Reading Recovery teachers as follows: Students in grades 1-5 who meet the designated criteria 2018-19 CEP 16 Grade 1- students who are identified as needing the program are receiving Reading Recovery RTI services Grade 1-5 students who are identified as “Low 1s” are receiving targeted instruction by F-Status teachers for literacy and math Grade 1-5 students who are identified as “Low 2s” are receiving targeted instruction by the in-house literacy and math coach The IEP/SETTS teacher provides supplemental push-in and pull-out services for students with disabilities who are in the general education classroom 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents receive promotion in doubt letters twice during the school year. o Key personnel: Instructional Cabinet members  Parents receive TCRWP progress letters at the close of every semester. o Key personnel: Literacy Coach  Teachers utilize their Tuesday Parent Engagement time to meet with parents of students who are receiving  Tier I and Tier II interventions. Teachers maintain logs of parent interaction. For students who are in the midst of the referral process, families will be engaged in the area of focus by going over the IEP with the teacher and other members of the special education committee. Parents' voice will be reflected on the IEPs, including within the PLOP and the summary sections. Training for parents will also be available on understanding students' IEPs and parents will be provided with information on implementation of recommendations. If needed, translation will be available in order to accommodate the family’s' needs. o School-based Support Team (SBST)  Workshops targeting instructional shifts in the CCLS/Next Generation Standards as well as RTI strategies will be held on Tuesday afternoons and in the evenings to support parents on how they can teach reading at home. o Dates TBD o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; faculty members serving as Grade Leader for each respective grade; Literacy Team; Math Team  Newsletters and weekly emails will be sent to our parents. o Newsletters are sent by the First Friday of every month o Email Blasts are sent out by our Parent Coordinator weekly o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; faculty members serving as Grade Leader for each respective grade 2018-19 CEP 17   Parents will participate in our monthly “Parents as Partners,” visits and our family events at Parent Teacher Association meetings o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; faculty members including ELL team members and classroom teachers trained in Close Reading strategies Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. F-status Reading Recovery Teacher  Before and after school programs (per-session opportunity for faculty members and Assistant Principal)   Two full-time Reading Recovery teachers   Professional development on Chancellor's Conference Day  Professional Learning Time  Calendar Days (outside vendors) Literacy and Math vertical teams (per-session) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will utilize a monitoring form for Tier I interventions to be collected by the SBST. The results of the STAR assessment for January will be analyzed by the Instructional Cabinet and student enrollment in and placement within the before and after school programs will be adjusted accordingly. Results will also be analyzed in March to serve as formative assessment that teachers can utilize to continue to modify instruction based on student needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be assessed through comparative analysis of student performance on the ELA and Math NYS assessments. Student data for each cohort will be collected and analyzed yearly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School Strengths SY 2017-2018 NYC School Survey responses reveal that 92% of teachers who teach students in grades K through 5 say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities (previously 85%) suggesting a shift in mindset as a result of implementation of SEL through the RULER program. NYC School Survey results also indicate that 92% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior ((by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings (previously 89%)). The Survey also revealed that 86% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations (previously 82%). In addition, after analyzing the last two years' 1-5 incident suspension reports, the number of level 4 infractions decreased from 35 incidents in 2016-2017 to 14 incidents in 2017-2018. Also, the number of level 5 infractions decreased from 3 incidents in 2016-2017 to 0 incidents in 2017-2018. Priority Needs While there is growth in this area, in order to foster a supportive environment in which all students feel safe and supported, there is a need to continue to strengthen the school based systems in place that foster social-emotional skills that enable students to make ethical and safe choices, initiate friendships and resolve conflicts respectfully, and contribute constructively to their community, and in turn, support whole child learning. PS 24Q will continue to implement a whole child approach, which ensures that each student is healthy, safe, engaged, supported, and challenged, sets the standard for comprehensive, sustainable school improvement and provides for long-term student success. PS 24Q will continue to ensure strategic implementation of the RULER program in order to target the number of Level 3 and 4 infractions that occur. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a decrease in the number of Level 3 and 4 infractions that occur by 10% from 54% to 44% of the total number of infractions within the school year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Training Dates: 7.19.18-7.20.18 SEL Team; Administrative Team Dates: TBD  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to support Social and Emotional Development and Learning (SEDL) implementation across the building, SEL (Social Emotional Learning) Team members will attend RULER training at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence. The SEL Team, consisting of K-5 grade representatives and member(s) of the guidance and administrative team will meet bimonthly to discuss repeat offenders- and to ensure cross-systems collaboration for students in greater need, including the strengthening of our current PBIS system, as well as developing protocols and systems for students with high-risk behaviors. The SEL team will also create professional development based on Anchors Tools of RULER and other research and evidence-based practices to be delivered to school faculty. In addition, SEL Team members will hold grade-wide assemblies. On Monday, September 24th, all staff members will receive a training on creating classroom charters. By September 28, 2018, all classrooms will have created a Classroom Charter for building and sustaining positive emotional climate. On Monday, October 1st, all staff members will receive a training on the mood meter. By October 15th, 2018, each classroom will have a visible mood meter. On Monday, October 15th, all staff members will receive a training on the Meta Moment. By October 19th, 2018, teachers will provide students with appropriate strategies. The SEL Team will also conduct two cycles of inquiry on SEL practices within the school year, the first focusing on recidivist students connected to multiple incidents. By Assistant Principals Said and Harrison, Guidance Counselor Yu All teachers SEL Team 2018-19 CEP 20  January 31, 2018, evidence of a cycle of professional learning around SEL will have been gathered by the SEL Team. The emotional state of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will be captured by results of an SEL assessment (TBD) in the Fall/Winter and Spring/Summer. Results of the survey will inform the guidance program and its individualized support of specific students as well as parent workshops, materials and resources needed to support families, the focus of professional learning for the staff. Our PE teachers will continue to incorporate PE National and State Standards and co-plan units of study with input of the SEL Team, while also attending to SEDL approaches to help develop essential social and emotional skills, knowledge, and attitudes related to self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making throughout their lessons including while teaching health. Strategies that will be put into place to address the needs of students with disabilities, ELLs, and other high need student subgroups include taking a "Meta-Moment," to take a step back from a situation in order to apply a strategy so that actions reflect their best self. Students will also use the Mood Meter tool to effectively identify and label emotions in order to develop the self-awareness needed to inform their choices. Members of the Student Government (GO) will meet with the Administrative Team to obtain input related to school-wide decisions, including lunchtime routines in the cafeteria and opportunities for students to participate in community service. Members of the GO will turnkey information to their respective classes and support SEL/PBIS initiatives through active campaigning. Select students (based on high infraction rates and/or "bottom third," academic status) will participate in the Be Buddy Club (BBC) during which they will check in and check out with an adult within the building. The "buddies," will use the RULER tool- Mood Meter to identify emotions at the start and end of the day, as well as to discuss how to ensure they are being their best self throughout the day. BBC folders will go home on a weekly basis for parents to sign in order to open dialogue around emotions with families. Select students; select staff members; parents of students within the program 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 Dates: TBD SEL Team; Guidance Team All students, including ELLs and SWDs in grades K-5 Daily Implementation; September 5, 2018- PE Teachers; SEL Team; Administrative Team June 26, 2019 Students Administrative Team Administrative Team Bi-monthly meetings November TBD 2018- June 26, 2019; Dates TBD Daily Implementation; June 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 21   PTA Meeting- SEL o September 27, 2018 ; Presented by the SEL Team  Parent workshops on SEDL practices and Anchors of Emotional Intelligence o Dates TBD o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; SEL Team  Newsletters and PTA Email Blasts with information on SEDL practices o Newsletters: October 5, 2018; November 2, 2018; December 3, 2018; January 4, 2019; February 1, 2018; March 1, 2018; April 5, 2019; May 3, 2019; June 3, 2019 o Email Blasts are sent out by our Parent Coordinator weekly Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  RULER Training at Yale  Hiring an additional 2-day/week guidance counselor  Professional development on Chancellor's Conference Day  Professional Learning Time (Mondays)  PTA Meeting  Additional Professional Learning  Restorative Circle training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November 2018 Social Emotional Learning Survey - Assessment TBD   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Student Suspect and Recidivist Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report January 2019  OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Student Suspect and Recidivist Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report June 2019 Social Emotional Learning Survey - Assessment TBD   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Student Suspect and Recidivist Report 2018-19 CEP 22   OORS Incident Location Summary Report Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Social Emotional Learning Survey - Assessment TBD   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Student Suspect and Recidivist Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths PS24Q scores consistently high on NYC School Survey responses related to collaboration on the part of teachers, particularly in terms of innovation and collective responsibility. Results from the Survey this year suggest that 95% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn (formerly 93%.) In addition, 96% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction (previously 97%.). Priority Needs We have identified that one of our needs is to build teacher understanding of Tier I and Tier II interventions for literacy and mathematics in order to support our struggling learners. Our 2017-2018 NYS ELA and Math data reveals an increased need to address the growing gap between our Students With Disabilities and General Education Students. While close analysis of student cohorts indicates a growing number of Level 4 students in the 2018 cohort, namely 33.3% to 39% in ELA, and 38.4% to 57.5% in Math, conversely the number of Level 1 students in the 2018 cohort increased by 7.8% from 10.1% to 17.9% in ELA and 5.3% to 7.5% in math. Overall, our ELA mean proficiency for our overall lowest third is 2.59 and 2.16 for our Students with Disabilities. Our overall ELA mean proficiency is a stark contrast- 3.23. Similarly, our Math mean proficiency for our overall lowest third is 2.88, 2.31 for our Students with Disabilities, and 3.54 for the school overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams across the school will focus on the implementation of RTI strategies to understand student needs and deepen their skill sets in strategic reading and mathematics interventions in supportive professional learning communities as measured by a 5% increase on the NYS ELA and Math assessments for our most struggling learners including ELLs, SWDs and students functioning at Level 1. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will be involved in a supervisory inquiry aimed at aligning Professional Learning to our the Instructional Focus. The Administrative Team will engage in non-evaluative instructional walks in order to support teachers. Classroom visits and observations will monitor and provide immediate feedback to teachers to enhance their practice and support their implementation of strategies addressed during Professional Learning. We will foster teacher-led learning walks utilizing different lenses and celebrate our learning through Share Fairs. Protocols will be established for inter-visitations so that teachers are provided by feedback from their peers in order to build coherence of practice across grades. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All faculty members Administrative Team, Teachers, Staff Developers Weekly Monday PL Time; September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 The STAR assessment will act as the universal screener to identify students who will participate in before and after school programming. Teachers who are participating in these programs will have planning time once a week to collaborate and implement RTI strategies based on student assessment data. Teachers will utilize short-term progress monitoring to corroborate students' risk status to be shared with families. ELLs and SWDs Grades K-5; Lowest third of each class A sixth period prep will be utilized by teacher teams to engage in discourse around student work products as they relate to goals set forth by the team. In order to differentiate and enrich instruction for our ELLs and our SWDs, teachers will utilize the, "Looking at Student Work Protocol," in order to understand data, identify trends, and plan for instructional implications. Inquiry teams will study those learners who are not making enough progress towards their goals and use of RTI strategies to address the needs of these students. ELLs and SWDs Grades K-5; Lowest third of each class A sixth period prep is being utilized by teacher teams to engage in discourse around student work products as they relate to goals set forth by the team. Teacher Teams Participating teachers; Administrative Team Teachers Weekly; starting October 24, 2018 through April 18, 2019 Weekly; September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Teacher teams Weekly; September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 25  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops will support parents with differentiated or enriched skills to help their children at home. o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; Literacy and Math teams; SBST  Teachers will incorporate suggestions about researched based strategies to address the needs of their students from their Professional Learning Communities.  Newsletters and PTA Email Blasts o Newsletters: October 5, 2018; November 2, 2018; December 3, 2018; January 4, 2019; February 1, 2018; March 1, 2018; April 5, 2019; May 3, 2019; June 3, 2019 o Email Blasts are sent out by our Parent Coordinator weekly  Parents will receive a report in January to inform them about their child's progress. o Key personnel for implementation: Parent Coordinator; Literacy Team; Literacy Coach; Administrative Team Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In-house Literacy and Match Coaches  Chancellor's Conference Days   TC + MiTC Staff Developers  Researched Based Programs, Training in use of these programs, and books on effective teaching practices, allocating a portion of Title I, Title III and Fair Student Funding to contracted outside consultants and for substitute teachers to allow teachers to collaborate and learn new practices  Allocated funds for a sixth preparation period for teachers dedicated to planning with a coach, staff developer, or administrator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The STAR assessment will measure student progress in their respective literacy and math goals in January and April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed through comparative analysis of student performance on the ELA and Math NYS assessments. Student data for each cohort will be collected and analyzed yearly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths According to SY 2017-2018 NYC School Survey responses, 98% of parents/guardians positively responded that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings (formerly 96%). Similarly, 98% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making, which is consistent from the prior school year. There is also an increase in the percentage of teachers who agreed or strongly agreed that at their school it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision, namely 84%, which is a 5% increase from the previous school year. Priority Needs According to the Principal Performance Observation (PPO) in SY 2017/2018, one of our areas of focus is to continue to build capacity of our teachers in formalizing curricula across all content areas to build further coherence within maps, tasks, and lessons. Our reviewer stated that, "In order to support the vision of our teams I am also asking that you engage in a study where you clarify with your teachers what defines curriculum and how it translates into the expectations of the documents that current exist in your school." Therefore, there is a need to work within teacher teams to assess the quality of unit plans, to determine how the Next Generation Standards are appropriately targeted in units, and how to scaffold for the different learners in their respective classes. In addition, it is essential that teachers clearly understand these expectations and receive professional learning in the Next Generation Standards to build content knowledge and improve pedagogy as well as to develop coherent pedagogical practices across classrooms. This is also evident in the overall rating distribution for Domain 1a of the Danielson Framework which decreased from 3.27 in 2016-2017 to 3.10 in 2017-2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will engage in and implement impactful professional learning cycles around newly learned strategies that promote rigor, relevance and individualized goal setting in literacy and mathematics that become embedded components of school-wide practice resulting in a 5% increase of Highly Effective and Effective teacher ratings in Domain 1a of the Danielson Framework: Demonstrating Knowledge of Content in Pedagogy. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Initial planning conferences will be used to discuss individual teachers’ professional goals by reflecting on prior year’s MoTP, student data, as well as using feedback from observations and visitations to identify areas of strengths and growth on the Danielson Rubric. Conversations around student work products and the use of formative and summative assessment data will be the center of each evaluation feedback session. Professional development and collaborative learning conversations will focus on the area of 1a of the Danielson Rubric and will be differentiated based on teacher needs. Administration will categorize and systemize school-wide goals in order to analyze trends, plan and implement differentiated professional development opportunities (with in-house and outside consultants), use of Chancellor's Conference days and non-attendance days. Departmentalization across grades 4 and 5, including departmentalization within our 4/5 bridge classes will further advance the opportunities for collaboration and coherence. Administration will monitor progress through informal visitations and formal observations, analyze student assessment data, plan for instruction based on data, specifically targeting instruction for our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, and adjust professional learning according to findings. Administration will also participate in supervisory inquiry in order to monitor assessment practices and their impact on student achievement. In conjunction with their respective grades, the Math and Literacy Team will meet bimonthly to create systems for giving students feedback on work products including revising school-wide writing rubrics to ensure consistency and clarity amongst assessments. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9.7.18 10.27.18 All students, with a focus on ENLs and SWDs On an ongoing basis; September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administrative Team; TCRWP staff developers; Math in the City staff developer; other outside staff developers; District Talent Coach Administrative Team; TCRWP staff developers; Math in the City staff developer; other outside staff developers; District Talent Coach Teachers; Students September 5, 2018 Literacy Team; Assessment Team; Administrative Team Subsequent dates TBD 2018-19 CEP 28 The Assessment Team will meet to analyze grade-wide trends in data for beginning, mid-term, and end of the year Math and ELA assessments. Professional learning will take place around assessment practices in literacy that support teachers' addressing of individual student needs and allow for high-level cognitive thinking through a wide range of pedagogical approaches. Teachers; Students Dates TBD Dates TBD Literacy Team; Administrative Team; TCRWP staff developers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops on feedback, rubrics, assessment  Goal setting/steps taken to reach said goals on the part of students will be the focus of parent conversations during Tuesday Parent Engagement Time and Parent Teacher Conferences  Parents will be trained on the Common Core Standards, Danielson Framework for Teaching, and the instructional shifts during SLT meetings, PTA meetings and Family Fridays: "Parents as Partners," so that they can better understand how to support students at home.  Parent communications, such as monthly grade specific newsletters and weekly “Email Blasts,” that detail units of study in Reading, Writing, Math, Science and Social Studies and school events, will also contain information related to assessment data and goal setting.  Workshops will be held in relation to reading level goals. Information from the workshops will be posted on our school website which is updated monthly to include activities that parents can use at home with their children. Letters are translated for our parents in the common languages of Mandarin and Spanish. Translators are available for parents at workshops in order to support our parents' needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy Team; Math Team   Researched Based Programs, Training in use of these programs, and books on effective teaching practices, allocating a portion of Title I, Title III and Fair Student Funding to contracted outside consultants and for substitute teachers to allow teachers to collaborate and learn new practices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January: Mid-point benchmark will be an increase of 2.5% in 1a. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 29  End of Year MoTP on the Danielson Rubric in the priority component of the Danielson Framework: 1a- Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths SY 2017-2018 NYC School Survey responses state that 100% of families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. Priority Needs Based on our data dive of the 2018, 2019, and 2020 cohort and outcomes on the NYS Math and Literacy assessments, student outcomes, we determined that there is a continued need to support the parents of our students identified as the lowest third and Students with Disabilities through workshops aligned to family needs and in their understanding of curricula in order to impact student outcomes and their children's respective goals and action plans within the different disciplines. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our Parent Coordinator and the school community will work to improve student outcomes of our neediest students by supporting parents through workshops aligned to family needs that support the academic and social emotional development of their children resulting in a 5% decrease of Level 1 students in the 2019, 2020, and 2021 student cohorts. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers who are participating in before and after school programs will utilize short-term progress monitoring to corroborate students' risk status to be shared with families. Parents; Students Weekly Email Blasts, created by the Parent Coordinator, will highlight in-school and community extracurricular activities. The Administrative Team will communicate with school staff about academic achievement targets for the identified sub groups (ENL, SWD, and Enrichment students). Teachers will then communicate with parents via school newsletters, PTA meetings, school wide events, phone outreach, and Parent Teacher Conferences ways in which parents can support their children at home. Parents/ Guardians Teachers and Parents/ Guardians Administrative Team; Participating faculty members Parent Coordinator Administrative Team Ongoing through duration of the programs; October 24, 2018 through April 16, 2019 Weekly; September 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 Daily; September 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 The PTA/Title I Committee will convene to create school-based experiences for families. Parents; Students TBD PTA/Title I Committee; Administrative Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  CookShop  Brooklyn Conservatory of Music (BKCM)  TheaterMoves  New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Office of School Health 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Researched-based programs, training in use of these programs, and books on effective teaching practices, allocating a portion of Title I, Title III and Fair Student Funding to contracted outside consultants and for substitute teachers to allow teachers to collaborate and learn new practices  PTA meetings  Funding for additional cluster teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The STAR assessment will measure student progress in their respective literacy and math goals in January and April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed through comparative analysis of student performance on the ELA and Math NYS assessments. Student data for each cohort will be collected and analyzed yearly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records; ELA scores;NYSELATscores; Teacher Referral; Diagnostic Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) An Extended Day and Title III After-School Academic Support Program is offered to give additional support to our students in literacy instruction. Literacy support is offered in 1 1/2hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays to recommended students in grades 3, 4, and 5. On Monday,Wednesdays and Fridaysfor 45 minutes. On Mondayand Wednesdays during the school day as a push/in - pull/out program. On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays before school for 45 minutes in a small group setting. The Title III ENL FUNdations Extended Day Program services targeted ELL students in grades K-2 with a Double Dose of FUNdations. An F-Status ELA support teacher will service targeted students who need additional support in literacy instruction. A MorningShine Before-School Academic Support Program is offered to give additional support to our students in literacy instruction. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school Before school During the school day 2018-19 CEP 34  Mathematics NYS Mathscores; NYSELATscores; Diagnostic Assessments; Teacher Referral Science Social Studies Running Records; ELAscores; NYSELAT scores; Diagnostic Assessments; Teacher Referral Running Records; ELAscores; NYSESLAT scores; Diagnostic Assessments; Teacher Referral Before school After school During the school day After-School After-School During the school day An Extended Day and Title III Academic Support Program is offered to give additional support to our students in math instruction. Mathematics support is offered in 1 1/2hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays to recommended students in Grades 3 through 5. An F-Status Math Support teacher will service targeted students who need additional support in mathematics instruction. An Extended Day and Title III Academic Support Program is offered to give additional support to our students in science instruction. An Extended Day and Title III Academic Support Program is offered to give additional support to our students in social studies instruction. On Monday, Wednesday, and Fridays during the school day as a push/in - pull/out program. Literacy/Science support is offered in 1 1/2hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays to recommended students in Grades 3 through 5. Literacy/Social studies support is offered in 1 1/2hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays to recommended students in Grades 3 through 5. As needed At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORs Data Teacher and PPT Team Referral Our guidance counselor provides intervention services in crisis situations for students and their families, counseling 2018-19 CEP 35  As needed During the school day students on a one-to-one basis and in small groups. Our Youth Development Counselor services our student population during crisis situations by promoting appropriate conflict resolution techniquesand Magic Circle for Grades K-5. In collaboration with our SELcommittee, we will be continuing our behavior plan entitled, “PBIS” (Positive Behavior Intervention System) to encourage positive student conduct. Our school psychologist provides intervention services for students and families on an as-needed basis. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At this time, for the 2018-2019 school year, we have zero students identified as Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School staff who become aware of any student who is or may be a homeless student and who needs assistance contacts the Student in Temporary Housing Liaison. Parents receive information sheets (McKinney-Vento Act Guide for Parents) that set forth the basic rights of homeless students when they are registered. These information sheets are available, in the office of the Temporary Housing Liaison. Parents also receive a Residency Questionnaire Form to all newly enrolled students and students who change their addresses during the school year. We enter information that a student is homeless into ATS in the student’s bio page and update changes as appropriate. We do our best to support parents in regular attendance of homeless children as it is of paramount importance. If a student has sporadic attendance, we contact the parent and the Family Assistant and/or Student in Temporary Housing Liaison to identify services that may be needed or whether alternative schooling arrangements should be arranged. Per Chancellor’s Regulation A-810, students residing in temporary housing are eligible to receive free school meals. Our SAPIS worker provides at-risk support in the form of groups to help students living in temporary housing with their social, emotional learning aside from their academics. Money is set aside to help students in temporary houses afford school supplies and trips. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All students receive teaching from 100% Highly Qualified Teachers according to the BEDS survey. Teachers receive professional development in all content areas and on the Common Core Learning Standards during common prep periods, Monday's Professional Learning time, Chancellor’s Conference Days, TCRWP Calendar Days, with District Support Staff, TCRWP staff developers, Math in the City staff developers, and other outside staff developers. When a vacancy becomes available, a hiring committee consisting of the Administrative Team, UFT representatives, and parents meets to read resumes, interview candidates, and observe demonstration lessons before hiring. The hiring committee then selects highly qualified staff members based on demonstration lesson including interviewee self-reflections of their lesson. Faculty members are given classroom assignments based on licensing, years of experience, previous professional learning, and on team consensus. Newly appointed faculty members participate in a "New Teacher Boot Camp," during which the Danielson's Framework is delved into, as well as expectations regarding establishing a SEL-aligned classroom environment and professional responsibilities. In order to retain highly qualified teachers, support and professional development are provided by our Teacher’s College Staff Developers, and in-house staff developers. New teachers are mentored during their first year. Teachers meet in teams during common preps (every grade has a daily common prep). Additionally, the "Spirit Committee," meets once a month to build morale throughout the building among staff and students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Differentiated professional development opportunities are offered to all staff members, including principals and assistant principals, teachers, paraprofessionals and other staff members. This year our staff participated in professional development with Teacher's College (TCRWP), Math in the City, Algebra for All, as well as attended PL in relation to ENL strategies, special education, and behavior management. All trainings are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and support teachers to implement the instructional shifts required for student success in ELA and 2018-19 CEP 39  Math. The principal and assistant principals have participated in training from the District Talent Coach, in aligning our ratings on teacher practice as assessed on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Families are invited to participate in Kindergarten/Fourth Grade School Tours where they are introduced to administration and staff members who will offer their services throughout the school year to their children. Part of the school tour schedule includes a visit with one of the Kindergarten/Fourth Grade classrooms. General school information is distributed to parents/guardians (available in English, Chinese and Spanish.) This includes contact information, pre-school preparation activities, information related to the Common Core Learning Standards, the current monthly calendar and a sample of the monthly Kindergarten/fourth grade newsletter. In addition, all information is available on our website and translated such as supply list, Book of the Month, etc. During the school tours, our school orally translates important information in Mandarin to increase parent engagement (this language is the most requested by our population.) At the end, parents are encouraged to ask questions to clarify any information. During the registration process, incoming families complete Home Language Identification surveys and the Program Selection Form for English Language Learners to determine their needs. English Language Learners also meet with an ENL staff member for evaluation. Families are encouraged to come to monthly meetings such as PTA meetings and First Fridays – both offer a parent-child activity to help communicate to our families the academic and social expectations for their children and how they might support this process at home. Parents are also encouraged to sign up for the Weekly Email Blast to receive current information about school events and activities. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 40  Teacher teams including Teacher Council and School Leadership Team will meet to discuss instruction and the assessments associated with them to measure student growth. Grade Level (horizontal) and cross grade (vertical teams) and Inquiry Teams meet weekly to review data gathered from these assessments. Differentiated professional development is aligned to the findings of the data and offered during Chancellor's Professional Development Days and Early Dismissal PD days. Teachers assess their students on NYC’s ELA, Running Records, and Math interim school-wide assessments and plan instruction aligned to the needs of students in each class. The Administrative Team meets weekly to review student progress, findings from informal and formal observations, and to adjust future professional development and professional learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $411,539 $41,260 $51,534 $0 $6,103,849 X X X NA X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E NA 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 41  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, PS 24Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents in understanding standards and assessments 2018-19 CEP 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent-Teacher Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent-Teacher Association ● supporting or hosting Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home School-Parent Compact (SPC) Our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas by highly qualified teachers Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 45  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community 2018-19 CEP 46  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs The Parent/Guardian Agrees: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  To support the School’s Code of Behavior.  To share the responsibility for improved student achievement.  To monitor our child/children’s homework and attendance.  To communicate with our child/children’s teachers concerning their educational progress or needs. The Student Agrees: ● To arrive to school on time III. Student Responsibilities ● To create a safe, supportive and effective learning community for my peers ● To understanding what I am learning and ask for help when I do not understand ● To sharing and communicating to my parents what I am learning 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The goal of our Title III program is to provide supplemental academic support for our struggling English Language Learners in grades 3-5 based on the 2016 New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL), and the 2017 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) as well as at risk students based on the AMAO tool analysis. Our Title III program provides support to students in grades 3-5. Our third, fourth and fifth grade English Language Learners will receive targeted instruction from 2:40 - 4:10 on Wednesdays and Thursdays, for one hour and a half sessions, totaling 3 hours per week. Our Title III program will began on Wednesday, October 17th , 2019 and will end on Thursday, March, 29th, 2019. The goal of this program is to increase our targeted ELLs' English language proficiency as well as their academic language fluency in the four language modalities across multiple content areas including (social studies, math, science and ELA). This program will be conducted in English for our grade 3-5 ELLs. Each class will contain up to 16 students. In the fall, we will focus on ELA and social studies skills, in the winter, we will focus on ELA and math skills, and in the spring, we will focus on ELA and science skills. Our 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade English Language Learners will be placed in 3 classes instructed by certified ESL teachers with a maximum of 46 students in total. We accepted a maximum of 46 students from grades 3 to 5 for the length of the program in order to maintain a low teacher- student ratio in an effort to maximize small group instruction for ELL students. The total number of ELLs participating in the Title III program is 46 students from third to fifth grade which includes 17 students from 3rd grade, 21 students from 4th grade and 8 students from 5th grade. Students were selected based on their performance on the 2017 NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT data . In order to provide targeted instruction to our English Language Learners, we placed students in three groups based on the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and current independent reading levels. Group one includes 16 students ranging from Early Emergent readers to students who can read up to level G independently. Group 2 includes 16 students who can read independently from level H to level L. Group three includes 14 students ranging from level M to level R. We are working on continuing to support our ELLs in different academic areas by enhancing and enriching each child’s academic language. Based on our analysis of NYSESLAT scores, we realize that continued work is necessary with our ELL students (regardless of level) with listening, speaking, reading and writing, specifically our ELL's receiving services between 4-6 years. We propose to provide support addressing content area skills in social studies, math and science with ELA support infused throughout the program. The program will be assessed by student performance on standardized tests, NYSESLAT, Interim ESL Assessments, class tests, portfolios, Fundations' unit assessments, TC Running Records, and teacher observations. We will have three points in which the instructional program will be monitored by the principal and assistant principals, in consultation with the ESL teachers 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information to revise and fine-tune the content and academic methods of instruction and adjustments will be made as needed. In addition to our Title III after school program there will be three trips (pending funding) scheduled to support social studies and science. We plan on visiting Flushing Town Hall during the fall to supplement the social studies curriculum, and the Alley Pond Environmental Center as well as the Hall of Science in the spring, to supplement our science curriculum (venues may change depending on availability and weather conditions). Materials: Instructional materials will be purchased to support social studies, math and science in the content areas. Some of the vendors we will be using are: National Geographic Theme sets, Leveled Non Fiction Libraries that promote literacy in beginner and intermediate ELLs. The Title III after-school program will provide “above and beyond” scaffolding support for ELL students to improve their overall achievement. We will also purchase Spotlight on Paired Passages, Strategies to Achieve Reading Success, and Ready New York CCLS (ELA). Home Language support will be provided throughout the program by some of our Title III teachers and also through the usage of bilingual dictionaries, glossaries and bilingual books. The material used during the program are different than the ones used for daily instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To support the teachers in the Title III after-school program (total of 3 teachers), we intend to conduct the following: during the program we will provide a professional development session to share best instructional practices using ENL strategies and techniques. Teachers will develop thematic lesson plans in social studies, math, science and ELA for supplementary instruction. The teachers will be provided with a total of 1 hour of curriculum development on October 8 th in the fall that will be facilitated by Mr. Saher Said the Assistant Principal in charge of ESL/Bilingual Programs. Our literacy coach and math coach provide support to each teacher bi-weekly. We are also working with Maryann Cucchiara on building academic language within the content areas, exploring juicy sentences (deconstructing, reconstructing sentences for meaning), looking at text complexity and the close reading of text for information. Ms. Cucchiara will meet with our teachers during the month of October 2016 and will be back on December for another professional development. In addition to that our teachers participated in professional learning with Teacher's College by a staff developer on the following tentative days from October 2018 until June 2019 - Teachers will participate in more professional learning activities provided by the TC staff developer on a regular basis on the following dates Tuesday October 25th, Tuesday November 1st, Tuesday November 29th, Monday January 9th, Tuesday January 17th, Monday January 23rd, Tuesday January 31st, Tuesday February 7th, Tuesday February 14th, Monday March 6th, Monday March 13th, Tuesday June 6th, Wednesday June 7th, and Tuesday June 13th. - Our teachers meet to plan daily during common preps and during vertical and horizontal team meetings. - Our teachers also receive professional learning in math provided by the Math in The City facilitator monthly. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development - Records will be maintained by the Title III supervisor including agendas for meetings as well as attendance sheets. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: During the Title III after-school sessions, we will conduct 7 workshops (pending funding) for parents of ELL's led by one licensed ESL teachers, one Chinese speaking teacher, and one specialty teacher (computer, art, science, literacy staff developer), a Native Language Support Para (Chinese) and our Parent Coordinator (no cost to program). Each 2 hour workshop will focus on building the bridge between home and school, and provide parents with home activities for families to engage in to support their child’s learning. Our school will plan 7 workshops for parents throughout the school year that will start from 6:30 pm and will end at 8:30 pm. Dates will be determined in consultation with administrative team, our PTA members as well as our parent coordinator. - In October the workshop will focus on creating a healthy environment at home and school as well as practicing close reading in social studies. - In January the workshop will focus on literacy and New York State tests. - In February the workshop will focus on math and New York State tests. - In March the workshop will focus on science. - In April the workshop will focus on family reading night. - In May the workshop will highlight the importance of eating healthy through exploring the CookShop program. - Finally, in June the workshop will focus on the importance of summer reading. In addition, the workshops will support parents to learn and grow in the English language and become more familiar with the American school system. In order to allow multiple means of representation, translation for the parents with limited English will be provided by the Native Language Support Paraprofessionals, as well as, parent volunteers so that each parent will have the same opportunity for understanding and participation in the workshops. Our school invites parents the first Friday of every month in classrooms to work in collaborative activities with their children to deepen their understanding of how to better support their children at home. The following first Fridays highlight some content that parents will observe in classrooms: - Science and social studies. - Technology. - Teacher's choice. - Writing. - Reading. - Math. - Curriculum fair. In addition to our Title III after school program and our parent involvement workshops, there will be three trips (pending funding) scheduled to support social studies and science. We plan on 2018-19 CEP 51 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities visiting Flushing Town Hall during the fall to supplement the social studies curriculum, and the Alley Pond Environmental Center, as well as, the Hall of Science in the spring, to supplement our science curriculum (venues may change depending on availability and weather conditions). All of our parent involvement activities are parent child based activities where they are given the opportunity to learn and explore side by side. Parents receive letters and fliers translated into their home language based on their response on the Home Language Identification Survey (when possible). Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Andrew Jackson School Borough Queens School Number 024 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Cassidy Coach Pascale Lindor ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Adina Grasso Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Li/ENL Teacher/Subject Area ESL Related-Service Provider Aleksey Shats Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Saher Said Coach Jaclyn Rajwan School Counselor Ellen Hochberg Parent Xiang Hong Song Parent Coordinator Lu Yin Field Support Center Staff Member Meesun John Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 8 13 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1005 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 444 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 44.18%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 1 4 3 2 K 1 1 Lang. Chinese 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 2 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 1 1 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes Teachers' College concepts of print assessments to monitor students early literacy skills including orientation or layout of text, direction of print, page sequencing, return sweep, one-to-one correspondence, and punctuation. Another form of assessment that we use regularly to guide our instruction is the Fundations' Unit Assessments. It helps our ENL teachers to assess our ELLs' phonemic awareness and phonics in early literacy skills. Based on multiple sources of data we found out that many of our newcomers require more support in letter sound recognition, phonemic awareness, blending and segmenting. Teachers also administer informal running records to monitor students' accuracy and comprehension regularly of fiction texts. We assess students' writing development by administering pre and post on demand writing for each genre where teachers and students identify areas of strengths and next steps based on a 6+1 rubric made in-house by our literacy team. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 54  All ENL teachers are trained on administering the above mentioned assessments and also on analyzing the data to drive their instruction by our school's literacy coach. All new teachers receive professional development during the summer and during the school year to build their capacity in administering the different types of assessments. Daily common preps are created so teachers can plan for instruction as a team with the support of out of classroom ENL teachers. During these meetings teachers review students' work and place students in small groups based on their needs. Also, during our Professional Learning Cycles on Mondays, teachers engage in inquiry cycles where they analyze students' work, land on inquiry question/s, identify research based strategies, revise their lesson plans and engage in lesson study in order to inter-visitations each others classrooms. Our ENL teachers meet with their grade supervisor and engage in discussions around students' data including their writing samples and current independent running records. Our Teachers' College staff developers meet with our teachers at least once a month to plan reading and writing units of study and model new strategies in classrooms to support all learners including ENL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school administers the NYSITELL assessment to our incoming students who were identified as possible ELLs based on the HLIS and students' interviews. The NYSITELL's data is used as a baseline to identify how each student performed in each of the four language modalities. ENL teachers plan their lessons based on the NYSITELL's data and provide small group instruction to target students' needs. Also, we use the Data Analysis Tool EDAT to monitor our ELLs' performance on the NYSESLAT. Once the data becomes available in August 2017, we will utilize the EDAT tool to identify areas of growth and next steps. We will also identify our ELLs' proficiency rate based on the 2016-17 NYSESLAT. In addition we will compare our progress targets and our actual progress based on the EDAT tool. We will also identity at risk students and share the data with classroom teachers and ENL teachers. We will also analyze the 2016-17 ELA and Math state assessments to identify areas of strengths and needs once the data becomes available. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers and supervisors engage regularly in data talks as we analyze the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Running Records, ELA and Math State assessments. Students are placed in small groups where they receive targeted instruction by ENL teachers. In order to support our second to fifth grade students who lack phonics and phonemic awareness, we created the Newcomer Program to support their language development. Entering and Emerging students are pulled out of the classroom four periods a week from grades 2-5 where they receive targeted instruction including Fundations as well as reading and writing workshop. ENL teachers also push in classrooms to support our ELLs in learning both content and language. After analyzing our summative assessments' data, we invite struggling ELLs to our Title III and Double Fundations programs to support their learning either before or after school hours. For the last two years we renewed our partnership with TheatreMoves where our ELLs in different grades were engaged in different activities promoting learning through movement to support developing language skills . In addition, our teachers work with an ENL staff developer Maryann Cucchiara on unpacking complex texts through close reading of juicy sentences across different content areas including science and social studies. Students are engaged regularly close reading of complex text and in rigorous activities such as the deconstruction of a juicy sentences. In addition our teachers also show students videos and provide them with sentence frames to support their oral language development. Our ENL teachers deepen students' understanding of Tier II and Tier III vocabulary as they plan word play activities including but not limited to say it, draw it, stretch it, and shades of meaning. These strategies supports our ENL students learning as they question author's choice of language and vocabulary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 CEP 55  The Response to Intervention (RTI) model holds significant promise for better serving English Language Learners (ELLs) who are at-risk for academic difficulties. The NYCDOE RTI model is based on three tiers of instruction and intervention support. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. Based on the 2016-17 NYSESLAT data, we were able to identify our current English Language Learners and provide them with the required number of minutes through Stand Alone ENL and or Integrated ENL. After that, students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Our Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction is tailored to meet our ELLs' language needs based on students' language proficiency by modality, incorporating research-based intervention strategies. As required by State law, when a student enters a NYC public school for the first time, a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is completed. After parents answer the survey questions, our ENL team determines the student eligibility to take the NYSITELL to determine the student's English Language Proficiency level. If an ELL student is struggling and performing below-benchmark, the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in a particular area of need. We believe that strengthening classroom instruction is a key step in supporting our at-risk ELLs. In order to support our ELLs , our school creates high-quality instructional environments that foster academic success. Our teachers encourage students to engage with each other in conversations on rigorous academic content. Not only our ENL teachers, but also classroom teachers develop our ELLs language and literacy skills across the curriculum. Teachers provide high quality instruction by linking students' background knowledge to the content at hand. As a school, we believe that thinking through conversation will help our ELLs to engage in productive dialogues and will promote productive struggle. ELLs who continue struggling receive intensive, and targeted intervention. Teachers monitor the ELLs progress by collecting data periodically to make educational decisions about changes, goals, instruction and services. Our school utilizes multiple sources of data to support and guide our RtI framework. Classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers administer running records to all students including ELLs to monitor all learners' decoding and comprehension skills. Also, after analyzing the 2017-18 NYSESLAT data based on the EDAT tool, we were able to identify a group of students who stayed on the same language proficiency level and planned daily activities to targeted to enhance their speaking and writing skills. In addition, our ENL teachers utilized the RLAT report and identified a group of entering and emerging students in grades 2-5 who lack foundational skills such as phonemic awareness and phonics where students receive targeted instruction to support their language development. In addition we will administer periodic assessments for our ELLs in the fall and the spring to monitor their learning. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The percentage of students who scored commanding on the NYSESLAT has increased from 20% (2015-16) to 25% (2016-17). Based on the EDAT tool 25.2% of our students scored commanding on the 2016-17 NYSESLAT. The percentage of students who stayed on the same language proficiency level decreased from 40% (2015-16) to 27% (2016-17). A 13% decrease of students staying on the same level is an indicator that our school is on the right path to close the achievement gap. 28% of students moved one language proficiency level and 5% moved two language proficiency levels. Also, based on the number of NYSESLAT test takers and modalities of strength, our current first grade performed very well on all modalities based on their kindergarten NYSESLAT.Our current third grade performed well on Speaking and writing based on their second grade NYSESLAT. Based on the number of NYSESLAT test takers and modalities of need we determined that our students would benefit from targeted speaking and writing activities to support their language development. Based on the ELL Data Analysis Tool, we were able to compare between students' performance on the ELA and the NYSESLAT. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 1 included 19 students Expanding, 15 students Transitioning, 1 student Commanding, 6 students Emerging, and 1 student Entering. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 2 included 25 students Expanding, 2 students Transitioning, and 8 students Commanding. 2018-19 CEP 56  The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 3 included 13 students Expanding, 1 student Transitioning, and 16 students Commanding. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 4 included 1 student Expanding and two students Commanding. Based on the ELL Data Analysis Tool, we were able to compare between students' performance on the Math and the NYSESLAT. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 1 included 9 students Expanding, 6 students Transitioning, 1 student Commanding, 6 students Emerging and 7 students Entering. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 2 included 12 students Expanding, 9 students Transitioning, 1 student Commanding, and 6 students Emerging. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 3 included 26 students Expanding, 4 students Transitioning, 12 students Commanding, 7 students Emerging and 1 student Entering. The number of ELLs identified on proficiency level 4 included 15 students Expanding, 1 student Transitioning, 13 students Commanding, and 4 students Entering. Our out of classroom ENL team identified all Entering and Emerging students in grades 2-5 by utilizing the RLAT report where they converted the raw scores for all modalities to scale scores. Teacher were able to plan targeted instruction to meet the needs of these Newcomers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our administrative team shared with all staff members the 2016-17 NYSESLAT results on the first day teachers reported to school on Tuesday, September 5th 2017. In order to ensure clarity, the ENL coordinator created an Excel spreadsheet that includes all students in the school including ELLs, former ELLs, and Non ELLs. The spreadsheet also includes the language proficiency level for each student over the last three years if applicable. All of our out of classroom ENL teachers have access to the spreadsheet. They printed the data by class and shared it with classroom teachers so they can provide targeted instruction to our ELLs based on their needs. All teachers received their students' performance on the NYSESLAt including classroom teachers as well as out of classroom ENL teachers. The ENL coordinator also identified students at risk and shared the findings with classroom teachers. Each teacher receives a copy of his/her students' performance on all assessments. Administrators and teachers engage in conversations about best practices and appropriate scaffolds to support our struggling English Language Learners across grades. In order to support our newcomers in grades two to five, our out of classroom ENL team with the guidance of our ENL coordinator were able to export the RLAT report into an Excel spreadsheet where they converted students' raw scores to scale scores by modality. Teachers were able to form whole group and small group instruction based on students' needs by grade. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 57  a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered by either dually certified teachers who have TESOL and common branch (K-6) or by certified TESOL teachers (K-6). Our ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program receive instruction based on their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT performance level. Our Entering ELLs receive a total of 360 minutes per week that includes 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Our Emerging students receive a total of 360 minutes per week that includes 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and flexible 90 minutes with Stand Alone ENL or Integrated ENL. Our Transitioning students receive a total of 180 minutes per week that includes 90 minutes of Integrated ENL and either 90 minutes with Stand Alone ENL or 90 minutes of Integrated ENL. Our Expanding students receive a total of 180 minutes per week that includes 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Our former ELLs from 2016 and 2017 receive a total of 90 minutes per week of Integrated ENL for two years. A total of eight classes in grades K-5 will receive ENL instruction by dually certified teachers who will provide Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL accordingly based on the language performance level of each student. The rest of students will receive Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL by TESOL teachers who will support ELLs based on their language performance level. Our Entering and Emerging students in grades 2-5 receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL instruction through the Newcomer program where students are pulled out and they also receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in their classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently have two Chinese TBE classes in Kindergarten. We have expanded the program to meet the needs of our parents by opening another Chinese TBE program in first grade last year. Based on CR 154-2, our Entering students receive a total of 360 minutes a week that includes 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA by a classroom teachers who hold common branch Birth-2 nd grade license and Chinese Bilingual Extension. Our Emerging students receive a total of 360 minutes per week that includes 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA and either 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL or 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA. Our Transitioning students receive a total of 180 minutes per week that includes 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA and either 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL or 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA. Our Expanding students receive a total of 180 minutes per week that includes 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA. Our students in the Chinese TBE program receive 45 minutes of instruction daily of Home Language Arts. Also, our Entering and Emerging students receive bilingual content area instruction in math and social studies. Our Transitioning and Expanding students receive bilingual content area instruction in social studies. Our TBE teachers place students in groups based on their needs and strengths. Therefore, flexible grouping is utilized to meet the needs of our diverse learners. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once students are placed in classrooms, the ENL team will group students by class based on their language performance level. The ENL teachers as well as the TBE teachers design program cards that meets the needs of each student based on his/her language performance level. Once program cards are created the Administration reviews the number of instructional minutes to ensure meeting the state mandates for each student. The administrative team review periodically ENL teachers' program cards to ensure all new admits and transfers are programmed correctly throughout the school year. The ENL instructional minutes is delivered in both the Freestanding ENL and the TBE program in alignment with the CCLS in ELA and Math, Science and Social Studies scope and sequence. The Native Language Arts is part of our Chinese TBE program that is delivered to students for 45 minutes daily. 2018-19 CEP 58  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During our school day and in our Title III extended day program, we focus on providing our ELLs with rigorous instruction in all content areas such as Math, Science, and Social Studies using the ENL and ELA standards. All ELLs receive the full amount of NYS mandated ENL minutes of service. With the growing percentage of ELLs in our building, we have found it necessary to further support our teachers with professional development, as well as meeting with the ENL and TBE teachers during common preps for planning. Our teachers have made significant instructional shifts in their teaching to incorporate Common Core Learning Standards across multiple disciplines, including building academic language, unpacking complex texts, balancing informational and fiction texts and engaging in rigorous academic conversations amongst students. Additionally, teachers have been focusing on close reading of text by asking text dependent and author's craft questions where students are engaged in reading complex and compelling text with a focus. Teachers also are helping students to self reflect on their own learning and development through the use of student friendly rubrics and checklists. Our ENL teachers use English as language of instruction. Our TBE teachers use English as language of instruction when teaching literacy and science and they use Chinese Mandarin when teaching Native Language Arts, Social Studies and Math. In our Chinese TBE program students receive instruction in both Chinese Mandarin and English based on the NYSITELL students' proficiency level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure appropriate evaluation to our new admits who did not pass the NYSITELL whose home language is Spanish, we administer the Spanish LAB-R to determine their language proficiency level in Spanish. Throughout the year, our bilingual teachers monitor our ELLs during conferencing by asking them questions in their home language to assess their fluency and comprehension regularly. Our Bilingual ENL push in teachers and our Bilingual classroom teachers who have both common branch and TESOL certifications use students' home language as needed as a scaffold to deepen students' understanding and to increase their engagement. Additionally throughout the year, tests are translated in students native language based on students' language proficiency. Our ELLs in the bilingual programs in kindergarten and first grade are evaluated in their home language (Mandarin Chinese) in Math and Social Studies as well as in Native Language Arts. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, we do not have any SIFE students. b. We currently have 388 students who have been in U.S. schools for less than three years. In order to better support our newcomers, our school purchased the Fundations program and trained all teachers in grades K-2, as well as all ENL teachers who support those grades. We also support our newcomers in the grades 2-5 by providing small group targeted instruction using Fundations and Reading and Writing Workshop four periods a week. Also, our school provides students with picture dictionaries, glossaries, and visual support during lessons. We also renewed our partnership with Benchmark Universe where all of our teachers and students can access more than 3000 titles from level A to Z in fiction and non-fiction. Additionally, ELL students receive testing translations during state exams, i.e. during Math and Science State Assessments. Furthermore, our school ensures that students who require translations during these state assessments receive translations even if that requires hiring outside translators. Our teachers use the Total Physical Response with our newcomers as well as Language Experience 2018-19 CEP 59  Approach to enhance students' learning. Our ENL teachers also are trained on the 3Ls approach by Maryann Cucchiara (Learning, Language and Literacy). As our teachers dive into the content, they conduct their own research about the topics they plan to teach by selecting appropriate articles, books, and videos to enhance their own learning. Teachers plan activities to unpack the language where they land on juicy sentences, explain Tier II and Tier III vocabulary to support students' learning. Finally, teachers craft text dependent and author's craft questions where students engage in meaningful conversations about the topic. c. To better support our developing ELLs, our teachers use technology to build on our ELLs' prior knowledge and to deepen their understanding. Our teachers practice using Multidisciplinary approach to meet the needs of our students' various learning styles including visual, auditory and tactile learners. Thinking Maps, sentence frames and word play activities are all utilized to build on our ELLs academic language across multiple disciplines. In addition, Our ENL teachers also are trained on the 3Ls approach by Maryann Cucchiara (Learning, Language and Literacy). As our teachers dive into the content, they conduct their own research about the topics they plan to teach by selecting appropriate articles, books, and videos to enhance their own learning. Teachers plan activities to unpack the language where they land on juicy sentences, explain tier II and Tier III vocabulary to support students' learning. Finally, teachers craft text dependent and author's craft questions where students engage in meaningful conversations about the topic. d. We currently have 28 students who have been receiving service for 4-6 years. Our ELL students that have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years are supported by their classroom teachers, ENL service providers as well as an AIS teacher. Students are invited to attend our Title III program twice a week for a total of 4 hours per week. Our teachers use the Total Physical Response and the Language Experience approach to support students' learning. To better support our long term ELLs, our teachers use technology to activate students' prior knowledge and to increase their engagement. Our teachers also use the 3Ls approach as well as a multidisciplinary approach to meet the needs of our long term ELLs. Our long term ELLs use Thinking Maps regularly to organize their thinking before sharing with a partner or before writing. e. We also take into consideration our ELLs who reached the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT in the past two years. Our Former ELLs receive a total of 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL instruction for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students have access to content specific texts on a variety of Lexile Levels from Benchmark Universe, which enable learners at every reading level access to the content being studied. Cooperative learning is utilized to further enable ELL-SWDs access to the content. Teachers plan activities where students engage in discussions using sentence frames to gain a deeper insight into a topic. Teachers plan word play activities allowing students time to engage in group discussions about Tier II and Tier III vocabulary. Linguistic frames are used regularly when students engage in discussions and when they write to ensure that students share their ideas in complete sentences. Students also have access to classroom leveled libraries covering fiction and non-fiction genres across different levels from which they can choose books on their appropriate level that interest them. Instruction is differentiated for all students including ELL-SWDs where teachers use strategies such as flexible grouping so students have different partners to learn from increasing their knowledge and confidence. Teachers plan to use different learning materials such as video clips and visuals to build on students' prior knowledge. Students have access to hands-on manipulatives and teacher made tool-kits to increase students' independence. In addition, teachers ensure that classrooms are print rich with anchor charts, labels, and students' work to support students' learning. Teachers are provided with in-house and outside professional development on strategies to teach the ELL-SWDs. Strategies such as front loading, deconstructing “Juicy Sentences” and digging into complex texts have been modeled for teachers to assist them in supporting their ELL-SWDs with making sense of texts and developing vocabulary. 2018-19 CEP 60  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All service providers of ELL-SWDs collaboratively discuss schedules and instruction to minimize conflicts between mandated services and instruction. Students receive ENL services through a push-in model where the ENL provider might team teach with the classroom teacher or the ENL provider works with a small group based on students' needs. Teachers choose different models daily based on students' needs. The team teaching model enables ELL-SWDs to work alongside their classmates and participates in differentiated group tasks regardless of their disabilities. Some ELL-SWDs receive services daily in a 12:1 setting based on their IEP, but in order to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment they go to an ICT class during reading and or writing to ease their transition to a least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order to support our Entering and Emerging students in grades 2-5 we created the Newcomer program to enhance students' understanding of phonemic awareness and phonics. ENL teachers pull out these students four periods a week to support their language development. Our ENL Teachers plan for guided reading lessons with struggling ELLs during DEAR time daily from 8:25-8:55. One of our staff members was trained on Reading Recovery during the summer and she also provide more support to struggling ELLs in first grade where she meet with students individually daily for 45 minutes each session. We also have an AIS teacher who engage in guided reading and strategy groups to improve our ELLs' reading comprehension. During our school day and in our Title III extended day program, we focus on rigorous instruction in the content areas including science, social studies and Math. All ELLs receive the full amount of NYS mandated ENL minutes of service. With the growing percentage of ELLs in our building, we have found it necessary to further support our teachers with professional development through professional learning cycles, as well as team meetings. ENL teachers also meet with classroom teachers during common preps for planning. During these meetings, techniques and strategies are presented and modeled for the teachers to assist them in supporting their ELLs during content area instruction within the classroom. With this support, teachers are able to differentiate instruction in their classrooms by using various strategies such as; pairing, modeling, bridging, using visuals as well as anchor charts, allowing students to turn and talk using sentence frames. Also, presenting picture books, landing on juicy sentences and identifying linguistic frames. Supporting each student to have an independent word wall to build vocabulary and providing students with leveled library books for independent reading. Students also have access to Ebooks on Benchmark Universe where students can read when they are not in school. Additionally, our teachers utilize multiple points of entry using Smart boards, iPads, laptops and classroom computers to support our tactile and visual ELLs. Our ENL teachers also push in during ELA, Math and content area instruction, to work with their students using differentiated materials and supplementing the curriculum. Children in grades 3-5 are encouraged to use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries to aid them in language understanding and build independence. We also provide services to our ELLs who have scored proficient on the NYSESLAT over the past two years. Former ELLs that are transitioning are taken into consideration individually and are given support through 30 minute D.E.A.R. time. ENL teachers work with small groups of ELLs during DEAR time daily from 8:25-8:55 where they engage in guided reading or strategy groups based on students' needs. All intervention programs are offered in English with Native Language support accordingly. In order to continue supporting our ELLs, our school participates in the CookShop program in all grades to teach our students 2018-19 CEP 61  about eating healthy as students engage in hands on activities. Through the CookShop program, some of our current and former ELLs are exposed to hands-on, multi-sensory approach that connects reading, math, science, to health habits. We have purchased the Fundations program to be used with all students in grades K-2, as well as in our Newcomer program in grades 2-5. We also are utilizing Go Math and Engage NY which are aligned with the Common Core State standards. Strategies from Math in the City are also used to support students' thinking as mathematicians and help them use mathematical terms to explain their reasoning. The intervention services is offered in English and Mandarin based on students' English Language proficiency. For example, our newcomers in grades 2-5 receive support in English and Mandarin. Also, our kindergarten and 1st grade students in the Chinese TBE program receive support in English and Mandarin. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue using the Fundations program with all students in grades K-2, as well as in our Newcomer program in grades 2-5. We are also utilizing strategies of Math in the City to supplement Go Math, which is aligned with the Common Core State Standards. Teachers in the building are incorporating Engage NY modules to support our diverse learners. Our administrators and teachers have also received summer training at City College for professional development regarding Math In the City. Additionally, our teachers have attended Go Math training where they turn-keyed critical information to the rest of the staff. Our students participate in the Arts in our Music classes; strings, chorus, and reader's theater. In order to increase students' fluency, we created a new position to teach Reader's Theatre where students will role play, create and narrate their own scripts as well as scripts related to the content. Our cluster staff collaboratively planned STEM projects where students will be engaged in solving real world problems. With the success of the CookShop program, we will continue our partnership with the Food Bank of NY and train more staff during the summer. Those that need extra support academically receive it through D.E.A.R. time for 30 minute period and Title III before/after school programs. In order to meet the needs of our Entering and Emerging ENL students in grades k-2, we created the Double Fundations Morning program. This program provides targeted instruction that builds on students' phonemic awareness, phonics and literacy skills. Outside services are provided by F-status licensed teachers who use the Leveled-Literacy program and Engage NY math; all of which are aligned to the CCLS. Over the past three years, all of our classrooms have received Smart Boards which has greatly enhanced the education of our ELLs as well as document cameras and projectors allowing multiple entry points for our students. In addition, all teachers received iPad minis to integrate more technology into their classrooms. Class sets of iPads and/or laptop carts were purchased for access to technology resources across grades. Teachers are able to use the Smart Boards and iPads to provide ELLs more support visually and interactively through the use of websites and Apps that enhance learning across all content areas. We currently have two kindergarten Chinese TBE classes and one Chinese TBE class in first grade. Our data indicates that we are closing the achievement gap by a 13 % decrease of students staying on the same level. Based on the 2015-16 NYSESLAT data we had 40% of students stayed on the same level and based on the 2016-17 NYSESLAT data we had 27% of students stayed on the same level. We found out that the majority of students who stayed on the same language proficiency struggled with speaking and writing so our ENL teachers will continue engaging identifying research based strategies to support their ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time there are no programs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 62  After analyzing all state exams including the ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT or NYSITELL, we place students in groups based on their proficiency level then we invite them to before and or after school programs. ELLs are invited to Title III after school, Double Fundations before school program, or extended day program based on their needs. Our Title III after school program supports our ELLs in grades 2-5. In order to provide extra support to our English Language Learners, we created special classes for our newcomers, struggling ELL students and first-time test takers, as well as our 4-6 year ELL population. Our program runs from October to April. In the fall, we focus on ELA and social studies skills. In the winter, we focus on ELA and math skills and in the spring we focus on ELA and science skills. We have 3 classes instructed by certified ENL teachers. ENL students in grades K-2 are also invited to the double Fundations program in the morning focusing on foundational language skills including phonemic awareness and phonics on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 7:15 -8:00 AM. The Title III program provides services to 2nd through 5th Grade students on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40-4:10pm. During these sessions, one class is designated as a newcomer class, where the teacher focuses on language development as well as using the Fundations program to support the ELLs with letter-sound recognition, phonemic awareness and concepts of print. In an effort to maximize small group instruction for our ELL students, we accept a maximum of 90 students for the length of the program in order to maintain a low teacher- student ratio. Additionally, our school offers a free of charge after-school program, called CCNY, which is located in the school building that supports our teaching throughout the day. This after-school program is offered Monday through Friday 2:20 to 5:30 pm for Kindergarten to 5th grade. Lastly, CookShop is a new instructional program that teachers are currently being trained on to allow differentiated learning styles through the culinary arts. Our students will continue learning about healthy eating habits and parents will learn how to prepare and cook healthy meals. Students are engaged in conversations about the recipes as they prepare them and read the steps to prepare healthy meals. All parent workshops will disseminate the ingredients used in these recipes so that they will be able to make these meals easily at home. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Over the past few years we were able to ensure that all classrooms have Smart Boards and document cameras to support all students including our ELLs by allowing students to access a multitude of online resources. In addition, all teachers received iPad minis to integrate more technology into their classrooms. Class sets of iPads and/or laptop carts were purchased for access to increase students' engagement across grades by showing content related videos, visuals, and interactive websites to deepen our ELLs knowledge. Students have access to content specific complex texts in their classroom libraries, and also online through Benchmark Universe website that has more than 3000 Ebook titles from level A to z in fiction and non fiction. Our ENL teachers also ordered guided reading books from Fountas & Pinnell as well as from other vendors to support our ELLs' in reading. We also purchased Passport for social studies units to support our newcomers and developing ELLs in grades k-5. Each unit has multiple visuals to introduce each unit, word play activities, multiple texts, and some activities. Also, there are links to videos and poems to support students' learning. We purchased also bilingual books to support our newcomers and developing ELLs in science and Social studies. We do not have long term ELLs at this point. Finally, our school purchased from Benchmark paired books (high and low) in science and social studies for all of our units of study based on the NYC scope and sequence. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, home language support is used as a scaffold based on students' needs. Some of our ENL teachers are bilingual and we also have seven bilingual paraprofessionals to support students across grades based on their needs. In our Chinese Kindergarten TBE program the home language support is provided accordingly based on students' 2018-19 CEP 63  NYSESLAT and or NYSITELL proficiency. For example, in the beginning of the school year 70% of instruction for our Chinese TBE program is provided in Chinese Mandarin to meet the needs of our Entering students and 30% of instruction is delivered in English. By the middle of the school year 50% of instruction is delivered in Chinese Mandarin and 50% of instruction is delivered in English. Towards the end of the school year, 20% of instruction will be delivered in Chinese Mandarin, and 80% of instruction will be delivered in English. Taking into consideration that not all students acquire second language at the same rate. In our kindergarten and first grade Chinese Mandarin TBE programs, Home language support is assessed in two content areas (social studies and Math) unit assessments, daily and weekly assessments are used to monitor students' learning. In our ENL program Home Language support is assessed during conferencing if the teacher is bilingual. Some students can speak in their home language but can not read or write in that home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In order to meet the needs of our newcomers, our school purchased the Fundations program to support our English Language Learners to develop early literacy skills. All K-2 teachers received training as well as all our out of classroom ENL teachers. A group of 2nd-5th grade students including Entering and Emerging students are currently receiving extra support through Fundations by a trained ENL teacher four periods a week during the school day. ENL teachers select compelling, complex, and coherent text sets in fiction and non fiction where they land on different parts of the text where students engage in discussions around author's craft. Teachers plan different scaffolds to increase students' engagement including but not limited to front loading, videos, word play activities, purposeful turn and talk as they share their learning using linguistic frames . Our Entering and Emerging English Language Learners receive 360 minutes which is comprised of Stand Alone ENL support and Integrated ENL support. Our Transitional English Language Learners receive 180 minutes of Stand Alone/Integrated ENL support. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL support. Those students who are at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL support. Our third, fourth, and fifth grade students use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. In order for our ELLs to speak in complete sentences we provide them with linguistic frames to practice sharing their ideas as they turn and talk in small groups. Also all of our students are getting support in using the six different Thinking Maps as a tool to unpack text then respond in writing to different questions. Our teachers received targeted training on complex text and unpacking juicy sentences by Maryann Cucchiara. Teachers collaborate in vertical teams to ensure that a variety of texts are used across grades, in alignment to each grade's curriculum. At P.S. 24 we believe in supporting all students to reach the expected standards by providing them with age appropriate scaffolds and access points to increase their engagement and understanding. All of our ENL teachers teach content such as science and social studies based on the scope and sequence by grade where they select compelling, complex and rich text. Our teachers do not teach literacy in isolation but they teach it as they teach content areas. Our ENL teachers meet with the classroom teachers during their daily common preps to plan different activities to support our ELLs based on their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building currently with another school. If we do share a building, our ENL teachers will meet with other ENL teachers from the other school and engage in conversations about students' needs and which resources could benefit ELLs. Administrators could arrange for teachers' inter-visitations and lunch and learn where teachers can share best practices. Our students might have similar emotional needs that the other school was able to address so the parent coordinators can share some ideas to improve our students' social and emotional needs. 2018-19 CEP 64  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year an ENL licensed teacher identifies the parent's/guardian's preferred language of communication, and newcomers are interviewed about their interests to better support them. Once students are admitted to our school we introduce to them key staff members including school secretaries, school aids, guidance counselors, administrators, and the parent coordinator. For example, our kindergarten teachers place pictures and names of key staff members on the classroom word wall so our kindergarten students become familiar with P.S. 24 staff when they come back to our building in first grade. As parents enter our building, we have a bulletin board that has pictures of all staff members so students and parents become familiar with them. Once students are admitted, our parent coordinator introduce key staff members by referring to the pictures on the staff bulletin board. By late May and the beginning of June we arrange for kindergarten orientation where the school principal, assistant principals, guidance counselor, ENL providers, and the school secretaries meet with parents and go over important information. Parents are provided with a list of websites/activities to support their children's language acquisition at home. Upon enrollment one of our staff members accompany the parent and the child in a school tour showing them different parts of our school building as well as meeting key support staff. Parents are invited to a school open house to meet our staff and administrative team in the beginning of the school year to learn more about Andrew Jackson Elementary School. During all meetings, translators are available to support our parents. In order to support our new students, classroom teachers partner new admits with other students who speak their home language to ease the transition. These students' partnerships support new students' smooth transition to a new school. We also will create partnerships between new parents and current parents to ease their transition and answer their questions about their new community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, P.S.24Q offers a Mandarin Chinese TBE program for Kindergarten and first grade. We currently have a freestanding ENL program for grades K-5. There is no language elective as of now at P.S. 24. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 65  With such a large number of ELLs enrolled at P.S. 24Q, all teachers and staff are considered teachers of ELLs. All of our ENL teachers meet with classroom teachers during common preps daily for planning. Also ENL teachers meet with one of the Assistant Principals weekly for professional development. During these meetings, techniques and strategies are presented and modeled for teachers to assist them in supporting their ELLs during content area instruction with language development in alignment with the CCLS. Our teachers receive on site support from Teachers College staff developers in reading and writing as they model different strategies to support all of our students including ELLs. Our teachers also attend professional developments at TC on calendar days based on their needs. A Teacher’s College staff developer meets with our teachers in grades K-5 on multiple dates for workshops and to model lessons. Each grade meets with TC staff developers 90 minutes ten times during the school year. Teachers attend district professional development with Maryann Cucchiara on engaging students in productive conversations, rigorous tasks and building academic vocabulary in the content areas as well as exploring juicy sentences (deconstructing and reconstructing) for meaning. As a school we also focus on selecting appropriate text sets that is not only complex but also compelling to our students. Professional development is provided on the Framework for Teaching. Our Administrative team meet with staff regularly to provide them with effective feedback after formal and informal observation to better support all of our students including ELLs and former ELLs as well as students with disabilities. Our ENL teachers have been included in Smart Board training and iPad training, Math in the City, Thinking Maps P.D., Go Math, Fundations, and CookShop in order to support our ELLs across all content areas. Our classroom teachers and ENL teachers are also involved in a series of workshops with Maryann Cucchiara (ELL consultant) focusing on close reading of complex texts in science and social studies. Ongoing professional development is offered to all teachers to support them in aligning their unit and lesson plans to the CCLS with a focus on language standards. Our non-pedagogic staff meet with the ENL coordinator to deepen their understanding of how to identify and support our ELLs. For example, welcome signs in different languages are placed at different parts of the school including the security desk where all visitors are required to present a valid ID to enter the school building. If parents can not speak English they can point to a language of their choice. Our school secretaries continue to receive training on how to support our new parents when they enroll or transfer their children to our school. Our parent coordinator continues to receive training on conducting parent surveys to identify their needs then plan workshops that address those needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by providing our teachers a total of 15% of their professional learning dedicated to addressing the needs of ELL learners. We dedicate 8 sessions of our 39 Monday Professional Learning to our focus on the 3L's approach to teacher ELL students. The sessions will be held on March 5, 12, 19, 26 and April 9, 16, 23, and 30. Included in these sessions will be a focus on deconstructing text with a focus on language function, linguistic frames and differentiate word play to increase vocabulary and deepen understanding of the content. Teachers will plan close reading questions to focus on authors craft and language choice. We learned about this approach through our sessions with Maryann Cucchiara an ELL specialist. Agendas and attendance is collected during these meetings. In order to meet the 50% professional development for our Bilingual Education and ENL teachers, in addition to the 8 sessions above, they meet for an additional 16 sessions to focus on the 3L's approach. These teachers look at NYSELAT and NYSITELL data to plan for instruction. These sessions are on December 11, 18, January 8, 15, 22, 29, February 5, and 12. Additionally, 2018-19 CEP 66  we have 4 days scheduled with Maryann Cucchiara where we collaborate with another school to implement the 3L's Approach to teaching ELL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In the beginning of the school year, our ENL out of classroom teachers as well as our dually certified classroom teachers with the support of our bilingual staff call parents and schedule times to meet with parents individually to discuss the goals of our ELL students. Teachers refer to the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, on demand writing as well as current formal or informal running records to identify each student's strengths and areas of need. Our ENL Coordinator created an Excel Spreadsheet that includes each student's overall Language performance level as well as scale scores in reading, writing, listening and speaking to discuss with parents during the annual individual meeting. Teachers will print out the list of students by class and will arrange to meet with parents. Teachers will add comments and parents will initial next to their child's name to document their presence. There will be a column on the spreadsheet where teachers will place Y for Yes to indicate meeting with the parent. The ENL coordinator will check periodically to monitor and track parents' meetings. Once teachers meet with all parents, a copy of the class list including teacher notes and parents' signatures will be shared with the ENL coordinator. During the meetings a group of our Chinese and Spanish paraprofessionals will provide translation and interpretations as needed. During the annual individual meetings, our ENL teachers will explain to parents their child's current language development strengths and needs as well as strategies to support their learning at home based on the Targets of Measurement tool. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer different ELL parent workshops based on a survey that we send to our ELL parents. Based on parents' choices we provide workshops on social and emotional development as well as supporting ELLs' academically. Parent and child workshops are offered through Title III funds to support our ELL families. Parent orientation meetings are ongoing to inform our new parents about their rights and the rights of their children as ELLs. Also we explain to our ELL parents the different language programs and the intended outcome for each program so they can make an educated decision. We invite our ELL parents to attend our monthly PTA meetings which are focused on engaging and rigorous learning experiences that include parent and child participation. We communicate with parents based on their preferred language of oral and written communication. Our school messenger system is one way we call parents and leave them messages in their preferred language to inform them of school events. Headphones translation systems are provided at our PTA meetings, assemblies, and SLT meetings to increase parents' engagement. Our school's website is updated to include translated monthly newsletters, school updates and activities. Every effort is made to ensure that all communication sent home is translated in the parent's preferred home language. Translated report cards are also sent home to parents in the following languages: Chinese, Spanish, Korean, Urdu and Bengali. Our parent coordinator conducts workshops regularly, along with other staff members to inform parents about what their children are learning in school and how parents can support their children academically and emotionally. Workshops are conducted to prepare parents for state testing and how they can assist their child at home. The needs of our parents are evaluated through requests to our Parent Coordinator and by reviewing and analyzing the school survey. This helps us to 2018-19 CEP 67  identify which areas the parents feel the school needs to improve upon. Each grade in our school designs a monthly newsletter that includes what students will learn in each content area, as well as how parents can support at home and important monthly events. Parents are invited to their children's classroom the Family Friday each month to learn about what students practice during the day. Some of the content that our school decided to present during the Family Friday includes the following; technology, writing, math, art, reading complex text, and a science fair. At this time, we have a partnership with the Food Bank of New York through the CookShop program that provides parent workshops at PS 24. Also, parents are referred to outside agencies when needed. We have helped our parents connect with Queens Child Center of New York for emotional assistance and counseling, as well as Flushing Hospital and NY Hospital Queens for their family's medical needs. In order to ease our new families transition to our school and community, we create partnerships between these new families and existing families. These partnerships will support our new families emotionally and will provide them with ongoing support from other parents who share the same home language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Cassidy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Andrew Jackson School DBN: 25Q024 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Cassidy Title Principal Saher Said Assistant Principal Lu Yin Si Chen Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Xiang Hong Song Parent Aleksey Shats Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Li Teacher/Subject Area Pascale Lindor Jaclyn Rajwan Coach Coach Ellen Hochberg School Counselor Danielle DiMango Meesun John N/A N./A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27//17 9/27/17 9/27/17 6/29/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q024 School Name: Andrew Jackson School Superintendent: DIMANGO DANIELL The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Saher Said Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S. 24 a variety of data collection tools is used to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs to be able to provide all parents with timely information in a language that they can understand. In order to determine the written translation needs of our school’s population, we use the Home Language Identification Survey, which is distributed at the time of a student’s registration, surveys from teachers and our Parent Coordinator, and the ATS RSEC, RHLA and RSDS reports. Our oral interpretation needs are assessed through PTA meetings, Parent/Child Workshops, Parent Teacher Conferences, the School Leadership Team, and the Home Language Identification Survey. We also use the RAPL report from ATS to show our parent's preferred written and spoken languages so we can use their preferred language as a mean of communication. 2018-19 CEP 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali (Bangla) 10 Chinese Gujarati Hindi Korean Mandarin English 861 0 2 11 5 0 0.73 62.44 0 0.15 0.8 0.36 0 Pashto (AKA Pushto) 409 29.66 Punjabi (AKA Panjabi) 0 Russian Spanish Tamil Telugu Urdu Ukrainian N/A N/A N/A 7 3 60 1 2 8 N/A N/A N/A 0 0.51 0.22 4.35 0.07 0.15 0.58 N/A N/A N/A 15 440 10 10 14 6 423 356 1 9 3 65 3 3 20 N/A N/A N/A 1.09 31.91 0.73 0.73 1.02 0.44 30.67 25.82 0.07 0.65 0.22 4.71 0.22 0.22 1.45 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The languages that represent at least 10% of our school population are Chinese Any, Mandarin, and English. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families  Monthly calendar  Grade level newsletters for each grade starting from kindergarten to fifth grade  English Language Learners    placement letter Invitations to the PTA meetings Invitations to the Title III program Invitations to after school program  Acceptance letters to Title III  program and after school program Invitation to workshops on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test  The monthly calendar and the newsletters are sent home to families the first week of each month.  The invitation letters to attend the PTA meetings are sent home at least one week prior to the meeting.  The invitation letters to Title III and after school programs are sent in the beginning of the school year then once we receive parents' responses we start sending out the acceptance letters. Finally, we send letters to parents reminding them of the last day for each program accordingly.  How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents.  Teachers will be hired to translate at after school parent workshops, evening parent activities. Additionally, we have purchased two translation interpretation electronic devices.  At P.S.24 we send parents letters in different languages based on their preference to inform them about the time and date of parent-teacher conferences.  We created a sign in sheet in our school main office that includes teacher's name, language preferred to communicate with parents then we assign bilingual staff to support teachers in need of translation every Tuesday and we allow 10-15 minutes per parent. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences September 12, November 16, March 15, and on May 22. Our teachers dedicate time on Tuesdays to communicate with Ongoing from September 2017- June 2018. interpretation service(s)? Teachers will be hired to translate at after school parent workshops, evening parent activities. Additionally, we have purchased two translation interpretation electronic devices. Classrooms teachers use paraprofessionals or other staff members by signing up in our main 2018-19 CEP 73  parents by phone, face to face or via email. N/A N/A office for translation services. If none are available they can use the translation hot line. N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Interpretations at P.S. 24 are provided by in-house school staff. In order to communicate with the large multilingual population of P.S. 24 more efficiently and effectively, we will hire staff members at per session rate to interpret in multiple languages. Teachers and paraprofessionals will be hired to translate at after school parent workshops, and morning and evening parent activities, in order to effectively communicate to parents in Chinese, Spanish, Urdu, and Hindi about school wide concerns, curriculum issues, and answer parent’s questions. School flyers are translated into Mandarin and Spanish as often as possible and sent home. In addition, our Chinese speaking staff, Chinese Native Language support paraprofessional, and our Bilingual Chinese School Psychologist, and Bi-Lingual Chinese social worker. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our administrative team shares with all staff how to reach out to the language and interpretation unit in case we need someone to interpret and no one is available at school. Copies will be provided to all staff that answers the following questions: How can I get a document translated? How can I get over-the-phone interpretation services? Where can I find additional resources? Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our welcome poster is placed by our school entrance by the security desk and in the main office. Our parents' Bill of Rights will be provided to all parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services. The Bill of of Parent Rights and Responsibilities includes parents' rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We will also place parents' Guide to Language Access poster by our school's primary entrance to inform parents of the covered languages or most prominent covered languages of interpretation services. Our security desk will have a copy of the Language ID Guide and also a copy will be placed in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to continue improving our translation and interpretation systems we will send parent survey in the beginning of the school year and another one at the end of the school year to monitor and improve our systems. We will also reach out to parents who attend our Parent Teacher Association meetings as well as our School Leadership Team members to identify areas of strengths and next steps. 2018-19 CEP 75 
