2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q025 School Name: I.S. 025 ADRIEN BLOCK Principal: MARYELLEN BEIRNE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Adrien Block I.S. 25 342500010025 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 25Q025 34-65 192 nd Street Flushing, New York 11358 718-961-3480 718-358-1563 Phone Number: Fax: Nancy DePoalo ndepoal@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: MaryEllen Beirne Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: Donna Gravesande Gina Bonventre Evan Weintraub N/A N/A AssundinaDePaola District Information Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place DDimang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergrast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens 11101 4th Floor Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MaryEllen Beirne Donna Gravesande Gina Bonventre AssundinaDePaola MahiKatechis Evan Weintraub Leslie Shepperson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Greater Ridgewood Youth Council Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daniel Flaxman LambriniPapalas Nancy DePoalo Maria Tegerides Miriam Zegarra Elisa Mrkulic Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Assistant Principal Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Our mission is to cultivate life-long learners by inspiring the intellectual, social, emotional, and physical potential of every student. Administrators, teachers, parents, and staff work together using Common Core State Standards to create a challenging environment specific to the individuals' needs in developing skills for a successful transition to high school, college and future careers. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Adrien Block I.S. 25 is part of a school campus which also houses World Journalism Preparatory High School and P233. All three schools share the gymnasium, cafeteria, library and outside yards. At I.S. 25, there are three Assistant Principals and three Guidance Counselors. There is a Guidance Counselor+ AP Team on each grade level and that team travels with the students throughout their three years at I.S. 25. The Guidance Counselors are able to assist students, teachers and parents in areas of social-emotional growth and academic achievement. Classes are taught by a “team” of teachers who utilize common planning periods to develop lessons, analyze data and student work, and to adjust units and modules. Time is dedicated to aligning instruction to state standards and NYC curricula. Teachers monitor data to address the needs of every student. Starting in Grade 6, and continuing for three years students will be immersed in one of several talent classes: Chorus, Band, Dance, Keyboard or Art. As they progress, students gain a love for the Arts and academic skills that will last a lifetime. Grade 7 takes an additional Art course. Science students in all grades participate in Urban Advantage. Urban Advantage is a science based organization that offers our teachers and administrators various Professional Learning sessions throughout the school year. In addition to Professional Learning, Urban Advantage provides our entire school community with trip vouchers to selected NYC cultural institutions including the NY Hall of Science, American Museum of Natural History, Queens Botanical Gardens and the Bronx Zoo. Urban Advantage also works in collaboration with IS 25 on our Family STEAM Night, providing representatives from these cultural organizations to participate in hands-on scientific exploration. All of the Science teachers who are a part of Urban Advantage also receive a stipend to replenish or improve the equipment in the science classrooms. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will be continuing our Schoolwide Enrichment Program (SEM). The Schoolwide Enrichment Program is offered one period per week for students in grades 6 and 7. This program allows students to have the choice of an elective class. Some examples of SEM choices include: Drama, School Newspaper, Yoga, Beginner Chinese, Beginner Korean, Computer Programming, Fashion Blogger and Sketching, to name a few. The Greater Ridgewood Youth Council offers an After-School Program on our campus Monday through Friday from 2:30PM until 5:30PM. Students are invited to participate in the program which offers STEM, Art, Recreation, Grub Club, Healthy Living, and Builders and Leadership Club. Students participate in trips to such places as: Liberty Science Center, Dave and Busters, the Bronx Zoo, and ice skating. Activities and museum visits take place during school holidays. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  We offer placements in Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) and a 12:1:1 environment. All students participate in a traveling program and are taught by content area specialists regardless of physical, emotional, or learning challenges. Due to an increase in our ICT population, during the 2018-2019 school year we will have 3 ICT classes on all three grade levels. Our support services include Speech/Hearing, Occupational and Physical Therapy, Adaptive Physical Education, SETTS Resource Services and Guidance. English as a New Language (ENL) classes are provided for students who are English Language Learners (ELL) based on an Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL). Students learn to read, write, listen and speak English, based on their level of proficiency. All ENL instruction is aligned with the state standards. In addition, ENL classes strive to help students share, preserve and celebrate their own cultural traditions and heritage. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. An element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress this year is Collaborative Teachers. First, teachers across content areas and on each grade level developed a STEAM (Science, Technology, English, Arts and Mathematics) unit of study. At the conclusion of each STEAM unit of study, we held a STEAM fair in which parents and family members were invited in to see the projects created by students using STEAM. Students were there to explain the rationale and elements of their projects. In addition to our STEAM work, teachers worked collaboratively within their Inquiry Teams to analyze their current curriculum in relationship to Webb's Depth of Knowledge and Common Core Standards to determine whether or not their units of study were rigorous or not. Once this was determined, teachers worked together to design new tasks, units of study and rubrics that would ensure with more rigorous instruction. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q025 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1028 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 21 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 34 27 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 58.0% % Attendance Rate 50.3% % Reduced Lunch 13.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 23.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 19.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.16 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 66.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 100 100 96.5% 7.3% 14.9% 2.5% 53.2% 0.9% 6 33% 8.2 61.5% 83% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths relative to the Framework Element of Rigorous Instruction involved our Math Teacher Teams on each grade level working together to infuse Algebra into their curriculum in preparation for Algebra for All. In Grade 6, teachers infused learning targets that were aligned to the Algebra Standards. In Grade 7, teachers considered the 7th grade Math curriculum and infused Algebra standards into each unit. In Grade 8, curriculum maps and instruction were revised to include more in depth work with polynomials and factoring. We will continue this work in the 2018-2019 school year, as well as, ensuring 300 minutes of Math instruction for students in grades 7 and 8. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in professional learning to deepen pedagogical practices and enrich curriculum so that students routinely engage in lessons designed to build capacity in Algebra as evidenced by professional development sessions, inquiry team work and revisions to curriculum and instruction resulting in a 10% increase in proficiency on the New York State Algebra Regents. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and administrators will be trained in the Algebra For All methodology. Six teachers in grades 7 and 8 are attending Algebra for All Training during the Summer of 2018 in preparation for the school year 2018-2019. These teachers will turnkey professional learning to their common planning team in September 2018. In addition, Grade 8 teachers are beginning to utilize Prentice Hall Algebra 1 Foundations Series Volume 1 and Volume 2 as the basis for the 8th Grade curriculum. This text covers Foundations for Algebra, Solving Equations, Solving Inequalities, Linear Functions, Systems Equations and Inequalities, Exponents and Exponential Functions, Polynomials and Functioning, Quadratic Functions and Equations, Radical Expressions and Equations, Rational Expressions and Data Analysis and Probability. Algebra concepts are introduced, developed and formalized through grades 6, 7 and ultimately grade 8. Teachers will deepen their knowledge of mathematical content through professional learning throughout the year. Teachers will work in Teacher Teams in order to collaborate and plan how to best infuse Algebra into their curriculum and what pedagogical practices align to the revised curriculum. Students in grade 6 will begin with the mathematical foundations that will enable them to be successful with Algebra in Grades 6 and 7. Students in grades 7 and 8 will receive 300 minutes of Math instruction which will allow for deeper investigation, making meaning and consolidation of their learning in relation to Algebra. All students in Grade 8 will have access to the Algebra 1 Regents. Teachers will design instruction that incorporates multiple entry points based on the individual needs of their students. Teachers will incorporate native language translation materials in order to support students' understanding of mathematical concepts. Teachers and students will identify individual areas of strength and individual student goals to work towards in each unit of study. N/A N/A Teachers and Students September 2018 through June 2019 Administration Teachers Professional Learning Team Teachers and Students September 2018 through June 2019 Administration Teachers Professional Learning Team N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and Algebra for All through updates on our school website (www.adrienblockis25.com) and via our online school management system (www.pupilpath.com). We will be transparent in sharing our goal with the School Leadership Team and also with our PTA Executive Board in an effort to demonstrate how this goal will benefit all students of I.S. 25. Timeline: September 2018 through June 2019 Key Personnel- School Administration, Math Assistant Principal, Teacher Teams, Professional Learning Team Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning Teams (Horizontal and Vertical), Inquiry Teams, Cycles of Inquiry, Professional Learning, Professional Learning Team, School Administration, Teachers, Algebra for All Training, 300 minutes of Mathematics instruction for Grades 7 and 8. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, we will administer a practice NYS Math Regents as an indication of our progress towards our goal of achieving a 10% increase on the NYS Math Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Practice Mathematics Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, guidance counselors engaged in teaching a Social Emotional Learning (SEL) program to each of the classes on their grade level throughout the school year. Students and counselors engaged in work around RULER which taught students to recognize, understand, label, express and regulate their emotions. Students were familiarized with the Mood Meter, the Meta-Moment and the Charter. This was and is very beneficial to our students, however, teachers were not as deeply immersed in RULER during the 2017-2018 school year. Our PPO feedback indicated that we should “work with a school based SEL team to design a cohesive vision around what positive social/emotional learning and personal behaviors should look like across your school….ensure there are clear professional learning opportunities with aligned expectations for adults in your building around SEL.” This will be our focus moving forward into the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers were introduced to RULER this year and our intent is to deepen that work during the upcoming school year. In order to support the "whole" child, this goal is directed at the students' emotional and academic development and success. In establishing this goal, we are acknowledging the importance of supporting the "whole" child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, teachers and support staff will develop strategies essential for personal and academic growth through professional learning provided by the SEL Team so that students learn to recognize and manage their emotions, develop positive relationships and productively work through challenging social and academic situations. This will result in a 10% decrease in Principal/Superintendent Suspension infraction codes that involve aggressive behavior. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Eight staff members attended a two day workshop at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence during August 2017. In addition, the SBST and guidance counselors were also trained in the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Program. Teachers will engage in Professional Learning throughout the 2018-2019 school year regarding how to recognize, understand, label, express and regulate their emotions in an effort to support students in doing the same. Social Emotional Learning strategies will be used in order for teachers to become more aware of students' social-emotional needs and the tools they can use to support students social-emotional learning. Teachers will be provided Professional Learning on the essentials of focus, mindfulness and emotional wellness. Auditorium periods will be used to connect with students regarding social emotional learning and the impact emotions have on all areas of their academic and social lives. During the June 2018 Professional Development, the staff was also introduced to mindfulness exercises by members of the BrainPower team. BrainPower is a scientifically based program that optimizes the classroom atmosphere and incorporates movement, mindfulness and focusing strategies to engage students’ multiple intelligences. Funding will be used for teachers and students will continue with this program and its utilization in their classrooms during the 2018-2019 school year. All students will be a part of the Mindfulness and Social-Emotional Learning initiatives. Particular attention will be paid to the varying individualized needs of all of our students and how to best support all of these students. Selected staff will continue to implement the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional program in high risk classrooms throughout the 2019-2019 school year. Through the use of student surveys, we will identify particular areas of focus around the social emotional needs of our school community and the Social Emotional Learning Team will work to develop individualized/small group interventions. Teachers and students will utilize BrainPower strategies in order to create an environment where effective student learning can take place. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018-June 2019 All staff members, students, parents Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, SBST, SAPIS Worker, Social Emotional Learning Team Sept 2018- June 2019 All staff members, students, parents Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, SBST, SAPIS Worker, Social Emotional Learning Team N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold parent engagement workshops in order to familiarize families with RULER and how it will be used with our students. We will also discuss RULER, BrainPower and mindfulness strategies with parents during School Leadership Team Meetings and PTA meetings. Parents and families will start to recognize, understand, label, express and regulate their own emotions in order to create and develop positive relationships amongst all members of the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. BrainPower Professional Development, Administration, Social Emotional Learning Team, Guidance Counselors, SAPIS worker, SBST, Ongoing Professional Learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORs data will be analyzed at a midpoint (February 2019) in order to determine if our Principal's and Superintendent Suspensions are decreasing in incidents involving aggressive behavior. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will refer to our OORs data to monitor our progress in this area. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, all departments engaged in a Cycle of Inquiry around developing rigorous units of study. Teachers in all content areas examined their current curriculum against the Webb’s Depth of Knowledge with Common Core Standards to ensure strategic thinking, strategic reasoning and extended thinking were strategically woven into each unit of study, task and rubric. Each content area revised their curricula to meet these standards. However, feedback from our 2017-2018 PPO Report indicated that we should, “look at student vs. teacher survey responses about the rigor of questioning and high level tasks across classrooms and consider what this data is saying regarding curricula and instruction.” In order to address this gap in our pedagogy, during the 2018-2019 school year, we will further our work in this area by constructing daily lesson plans that promote abstract thinking by our students thereby increasing the rigor of instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, we will deepen the capacity of the teachers to design and implement rigorous daily instruction by creating lesson plans and questioning that integrate elements of critical thinking, productive struggle and Growth Mindset resulting in a 3% increase of our sub-groups on the STAR Assessments and Teacher ADVANCE data. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers have taken part in professional learning around creating rigorous units of study, tasks and rubrics that are aligned to the New York State Standards. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will receive continued professional learning around “The Learning Pit,” which is a model by James Nottingham, which explains how and why challenge is necessary for learning. In implementing its elements, it is our goal to foster a growth mindset (Dweck) in all classrooms. “In a growth mindset, people believe that their most basic abilities can be developed through dedication and hard work—brains and talent are just the starting point. This view creates a love of learning and a resilience that is essential for great accomplishment,” writes Dweck. Teachers will work towards creative cognitive conflict in the minds of students so that they engage in a productive struggle. The stages of The Learning Pit include: Concept (identify a concept), Conflict (set up cognitive conflict or dilemma), Construct (provide opportunities for students to wrestle with the challenge and attempt to figure it out) and Consider (identify the new learning and apply it to different contexts. Teachers will facilitate collaborative conversations among students as they engage in this abstract thinking. Teachers will also engage in a book study around Ron Berger’s Leaders of Their Own Learning: Transforming Schools Through Student-Engaged Assessment with particular attention paid to learning targets for lessons and how these targets provide students with clear goals that they can work towards and achieve. Teachers will continue to support students’ learning based on individual student data. Teachers will incorporate various strategies to support students such as: formative assessment protocols, pre and post assessments/tasks, graphic organizers, text chunking, close reads, choral reading, sentence stems, framed motivation, Shared Inquiry, Socratic Seminar, vocabulary word play (shades of meaning, Grow It, Act it Out), academic vocabulary, peer feedback, self-reflection, summary frames, student discussion, native language supports, visuals, book clubs, strategically leveled questioning, and various forms of Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept 2017-June 2018 School Administration, Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher All teachers Sept 2017-June 2018 School Administration, Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 20  technology (EngageNY, School Website, Study Island, Promethean Boards, Flight Simulator). N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies through daily updates on the school website (www.adrienblockis25.com) and online school management system (www.Pupil Path.com). We will be transparent in sharing this goal with our School Leadership Team and deepening parents' understanding of how this goal will benefit their children and all of the students of I.S. 25. Timeline: September 2018 and June 2019. Teacher teams meet three times per week for inquiry and common planning. Key Personnel: Administration, School Leadership Team, teachers and students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include personnel, materials, professional learning, attendance at conferences and events. Common planning time (horizontal and vertical teams), cycles of inquiry, and supervisory inquiry. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, we will review our STAR Assessment and ADVANCE data to analyze it for growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the STAR Assessment, as well as, ADVANCE data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our PPO states that the principal “strategically manages budget and programming in order to support school wide goals and action plans” and that the principal uses “a wide range of data points to monitor work throughout the school year.” We will continue to build upon these strengths moving forward into the 2018-2019 school year. Our PPO feedback also states, that we need to “develop aligned tools that will allow you to evaluate and adjust the impact of your decisions on teacher practice and student outcomes and create systems that will allow you to continuously monitor and revise curricular and instructional initiatives you have implemented within and across grades and content areas over time to ensure embedded practices.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement systems to evaluate the impact of professional learning and cycles of inquiry on teacher and student progress resulting in improved outcomes for students as evidenced by a 5% increase on the NYS ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Teachers will continue to engage in Cycles of Inquiry during the 2018-2019 school year. Topics to be covered include a book study around Ron Berger's Leaders of Their Own Learning: Transforming Schools Through Student-Engaged Assessment, Algebra for All, Social Emotional Learning and Inter-Visitation. Administration will implement systems (surveys, administrative walk-throughs and inter-visitations) in order to evaluate the effectiveness of Professional Learning taking place during cycles of inquiry. Professional Learning will be specific in order to provide strategies that address the needs of select student sub-groups and individual students. Teachers of varying specialties (SWD, ENL, General Ed) will share best practices on how to support students' needs. Inter-visitations will target areas covered in professional learning in relation to the needs of students. N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers and students Start Date: Sept 2018 School Administration, End Date: June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teachers All teachers and students Start Date: School Administration, Sept 2017 End Date: June 2018 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teachers N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership through making this goal transparent through the School Leadership Team and sharing it with parents at PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Administration, Peer Collaborative Teacher, all teachers, Parent Coordinator, technological resources, Common Planning, Inquiry Team work, Inter-Visitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 24  By February 2019, we will look at the midpoint progress on the STAR Reading and Math Assessments in conjunction with the baseline assessments for student improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Star Reading and Math Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, students became deeply familiar with RULER. Students engaged in social emotional work with their guidance counselors and identified how they want to feel when they are at school. Similarly, teachers were introduced to RULER and its components. The staff created a school charter which documented how they want to feel when they are at work. Teachers and students were introduced to mindfulness strategies and harnessing the Meta-Moment in order to foster positive relationships throughout the school community. Moving forward into the 2018-2019 school year, we will familiarize parents with RULER and other mindfulness strategies in order to bridge the gap between school and home in the area of social emotional learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, IS 25 will have held at least four Parent Engagement workshops around Social Emotional Learning (eg. RULER and BrainPower) strategies in order to support and partner with parents to support their child(ren). 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers, students and parents will be immersed in Yale's RULER in order to effectively deal with their emotions and focus on creating a positive and effective learning environment for the entire school community. In addition, all constituents will be familiarized with BrainPower in order to help your students focus better on their work, gain confidence in themselves, build harmonious relationships, understand and manage their emotions and improve their academic performance. We will utilize the parent Coordinator to bridge a connection between the BrainPower classroom and home. Topics will include stress management, homework tips, mindful parenting, positive discipline and proactive communication. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and their families September 2018-May 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Teachers, Students, Parents All parent workshops will be offered to parents of general education, students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Translators will be provided as necessary. All students and their families September 2018-May 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Students, Parents N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  School Administration, BrainPower, Parent Coordinator, PTA, school staff, Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will have held one Mindful Parenting event in which we invite parents to engage in mindfulness work around RULER and/or BrainPower strategies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at Parent Social Emotional Workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest 1/3 Citywide based on New York State ELA Assessment 2017-2018 Lowest 1/3 Citywide based on New York State Math Assessment 2017-2018 Results of Science MOSL pre-assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Expeditionary Learning ● Small Group Instruction ● Study Island Writing Aligned to Common Core Across Curriculum ● Peer Tutoring One to One Instruction ● Lunch ● After School ● Computer Technology Saturday Academy 2018 ● Lunch ● After School ● CMP3 ● Study Island Writing Aligned to Common Core Across Curriculum ● Smart Science Labs ● Study Island Writing Aligned to Common Core Across Curriculum ● Small Group Instruction ● Peer Tutoring  One to One Instruction ● Computer Technology Saturday Academy 2018 ● Small Group Instruction ● Peer Tutoring One to One Instruction ● Lunch ● After School ● Computer Technology Social Studies Results of Social Studies MOSL pre-assessment ● Study Island Writing Aligned to Common Core Across Curriculum ● Small Group Instruction ● Peer Tutoring One to One Instruction  Saturday Academy 2019 ● Lunch ● After School ● Computer Technology 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Referrals from Teachers, Parents, Prior School ● Professional Learning Committee ● School Implementation Team ● Students Community Organizations ● Goal Setting ● Individual vs Group counseling ● Transition Preparation for High School ● Small Group Counseling ● Large Group Counseling ● 1 on 1 Counseling ● College Exploration ● Bilingual Counseling ● Career Exploration Bullying ● SAPIS Counseling  Saturday Academy 2019 ● Lunch ● Auditoriums ● Pull-Out ● Classroom Lessons Computer Technology Classes 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  Full fare MetroCard, free lunch, gym uniforms, books, school supplies 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 10, 315 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP 38  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary ad Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Adrien Block I.S. 25 has a total 1, 038 students which is an increase of 56 students from the previous school year. In addition, we have 31 students that are new to the NYC Board of Education, the majority of which are from other countries. Based on our most recent data, 155 of our students are ELL students of which 21 are former ELLs for the 2017-2018 school year. Grade 6 has a total of 56 ENL students, Grade 7 has 46 ENL students and Grade 8 has 53 ENL students. In addition, we identified the Hispanic male subgroup as an area for focus this school year (most of which are ENL students) and will continue to focus on this subgroup during the 2018-2019 school year. Due to a large majority of our ENL students not being successful with the writing and speaking modalities of the NYSESLAT and due to the fact that the majority will take the New York State ELA Exam, we would like to prepare them for both by having a Saturday Academy to address the expectations of these exams. Subgroups and Grade Levels to be Served: ENL students in grades 6, 7, and 8 (Newcomers, Middle year ELLs, Long-term ELLs, Special Education ELLs, SIFE and Former ELLs across all three grade levels), SWDs, males and females. # and Types of Certified Teachers: 8 Saturday Academy teachers, 2 of which are ENL and 6 of which are content area specialists Schedule and Duration: A Saturday Academy inclusive of eight teachers for seven weeks for 3 and 1/2 hours per week Language of Instruction: All classes will be in English. However, in order to incorporate and accommodate native language, students will have dictionaries and glossaries available in their home language, as well as, iPads to use for translations, visuals and audio. Types of Materials: Instructional Materials Subgroups and Grade Levels to be Served: All subgroups (Newcomers, Middle year ELLs, Long-term ELLs, Special Education ELLs, SIFE and Former ELLs across all three grade levels) with a special focus on our Hispanic male subgroup. Language of Instruction: All classes will be in English. However, in order to incorporate and accommodate native language, students will have dictionaries and glossaries available in their language, as well as, iPads to use for translations, visuals and audio. 2018-19 CEP 44 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: According to our ADVANCE data, our teachers need support in Domain 1- Planning and Preparation with a particular focus on Designing Coherent Instruction which incorporates scaffolding and supports to meet the individual needs of our varied learners. Teachers to Receive Training: During the 2017-2018 school year, 2 additional teachers (ELA) received ENL training from Maryann Cucchiara which brings the total of teachers trained to seven. In addition, ELL teachers that previously received the training are paired up with content area counter parts in order to turnkey and embed these ELL strategies into the content area curricula. Various content area teachers are also enrolled in Professional Learning through the BFSC entitled: Differentiated Instruction: Ensuring Active Assessment Meets the Needs of All Students, Struggling Readers: Creating a Toolkit of Strategies to Improve Reading, Science For All: Teaching Students with Diverse Needs and Student Led Conferences: Empowering Students to Be Self Reflective Learners. Schedule and Duration: The Maryann Cucchiara workshops meet once a month over the course of the 2017-2018 school year. The BFSC Professional Learning opportunities are three day workshops dispersed throughout the school year. Topics to Be Covered: The work with Maryann Cucchiara will focus specifically on work with ENL students regarding selection of complex and compelling texts, thematic units of study, differentiated academic linguistic frames, framed motivation, word play strategies, close reading and differentiated tasks. Participants in the Differentiated Instruction sessions will develop a shared understanding of how effective formative assessment strategies will impact student engagement while meeting the needs of all learners. Participants will define the connection between growth mindset and differentiation and how it impacts both student achievement and pedagogy. In addition, they will explore the various elements of differentiation while developing a toolkit of best practices to utilize in student-centered classroom environments. Struggling Reader participants will unpack the text,Teaching to Transform, an instructional practice guide to support struggling readers in 6-12. We will examine foundational skills and strategies to support readers. Teachers will build a toolkit of strategies to improve fluency, vocabulary, boost student engagement and lift the level of comprehension and interpretation. Science for All participants will explore the importance of growth mindsets in maintaining high expectations, plan instruction that builds on students’ strengths, and tier instruction to reach all students. Participants will learn different ways to engage students in 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development science through collaboration, choice, questioning, and open-ended tasks. Participants in Student Led Conferences will build a shared understanding of the structures and routines needed to make student-led conferences successful. They will create a toolbox of promising practices that encourage student autonomy, strengthen self-assessment practices such as goal setting, and promote parent engagement. Impact on ELL students: Teachers will create concrete plans to meet all students' needs and develop a toolkit of strategies to maintain high expectations for all students, students will be engaged by their teachers through collaboration, choice, questioning, and open-ended tasks. In addition, staff will be able to analyze the performance of ELLs at the school level and understand what ENL instruction looks like, as well as, identify common stumbling blocks for ELLs and teachers of ELLs and create an action plan to address those stumbling blocks. Teachers will learn how to impact students through close reading skills, building academic vocabulary, chunking of text, choosing complex and compelling reading and working with sentence structure. Insight will be made into how reading, writing and language is approached by teachers of ELLs and planning instruction to specifically meet the needs of ELL students. Maintenance of Professional Learning Attendance: This will be maintained through our Professional Learning Plan in conjunction with our supervisors, programming and our payroll secretary. Name of Provider: BFSC, Maryann Cucchiara, Cost: District 25 ENL Cohort and BFSC Professional Learning is at no cost. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 72% of parents responded that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. In addition, 83% of families said that the school regularly communicates with them about how they can help their child learn best. As evidenced by our 2018-2019 CEP Goal for Strong Family and Community Ties: By June 2019, I.S. 25 will have held at least two parent involvement workshops around RULER and BrainPower strategies in order to support parents in with students and school staff towards a more positive and supportive learning environment as evidenced by results on our 2018 Learning Environment Survey. Schedule and Duration: We hold a Parent Orientation Meeting for all ENL parents, as well as, an Open House where parents of ENL students are able to receive training on PupilPath (parent communication tool) and get information from content area and ENL teachers regarding 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the State Standards. We provide translators when necessary. We also provide additional parent trainings regarding PupilPath and the standards throughout the school year. ENL parents are encouraged to participate in monthly PTA meetings and are welcome to serve on the School Leadership Team. PupilPath enables parents and students to communicate with teachers and staff on an ongoing basis. PupilPath also allows parents and school staff to have messages translated into the home language, making communication between school and home that much easier. All parents are also welcome to take part in the Tuesday Parent Engagement time where they can meet with all of their child's teachers and translation is provided when necessary. Topics to Be Covered: State Standards, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, CMP3/GoMath Math Curriculum, Passport Social Studies Curriculum, Book Clubs, PupilPath, Building Response Team Protocols, Internet Safety, Drug and Alcohol Prevention Provider: I.S. 25 Staff (Content Area Teachers, ENL Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Supervisors, Guidance Staff (of which two are bilingual), SAPIS Worker and Parent Coordinator) How Parents Will Be Notified of These Activities: Parents will be notified through back-packed letters sent home in English and in native languages, K-12 Phone System, Parent Coordinator e-mail chain and listed on Monthly Calendars, as well as, PupilPath notifications translated into the home language. Participation by Parents: Parents will be able to participate by working in conjunction with their children and/or the support of a translator. PupilPath has a translation option for communication in the home language. We also utilize the NYCDOE Office of Translation and Interpretation. *Records of these events will be maintained by the Parent Coordinator and/or ENL Department. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) Supervisor- $1, 652.00 Teachers- $11, 334.64  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 0.00 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. $5, 011.36 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teacher per session $57.83 x 24.5 hours= $1, 214.43 per teacher $1, 214.43x 8 teachers= $9, 715.44 0.00 Finish Line New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Chart Paper, notebooks, pens, highlighters, etc)  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0.00 0.00 0.00 17, 998.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Adrien Block I.S. 25 Borough Queens School Number 025 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal MaryEllen Beirne Coach Donna Ituarte ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher JiEun Lee Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Chin Teacher/Subject Area Anna Choi/ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider Gail Steinman Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Nancy DePoalo Coach School Counselor Valentina Marsalek Parent Petroula Siouti Parent Coordinator Jacquelyn Trotter Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Rozos Vasiliou Other (Name and Title) Donna Gravesande C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1048 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 132 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.60%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are given pre-assessments, mid-assessments and post assessments in every subject area (English, Math, Social Studies and Science). Assessments are translated into the native language as needed. Through these assessments, students develop goals for themselves for each module and/or unit of study. Literacy is a focus throughout all subject areas. All subject areas utilize pedagogical methodologies to assess students' Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking skills. In addition, we utilize the STAR Assessment in order to monitor students' progress in ELA and Math three times per year (October, February and May). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The STAR Assessment provides teachers with a Reading and Math level for each student in order to assist teachers in differentiating instruction for their varied learners. In addition, the results of the STAR Assessment include an item analysis in which teachers can identify which specific skills each student needs support with. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We utilize data from the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, NYS Math, STAR Assessment, ongoing pre- and post-assessments, conferencing, quantitative and qualitative classroom data, as well as, ongoing formative assessments and student portfolios. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers are members of a grade planning team, as well as, a subject/grade inquiry team in which they discuss students, data, pedagogy, instruction, interventions, protocols, strategies and make revisions to curriculum based on student data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We utilize NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, State ELA and Math data, STARS data and qualitative and quantitative classroom data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have an ESL Coordinator that aggregates and disseminates assessment data to school staff. It is this data that informs our instructional and CEP goals, as well as, identifies target groups within the student population. Teachers use the data provided by the ESL Coordinator to inform their daily planning and in order to provide supports for students. In addition, time is spent during Inquiry Cycles to address the needs of our general population, as well as, our subgroups. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. I.S. 25 offers Freestanding ESL. Students receive integrated and stand-alone ENL in an integrated block program. During Stand-alone ENL the instruction is delivered by a certified ESL teacher. During Integrated ENL, ESL teachers work with classroom teachers to support the ELL population and review language structures critical for student comprehension. Students at the Entering Level receive 360 minutes of ENL (180 Stand Alone and 180 Integrated). Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL (90 Stand Alone, 180 Integrated and 90 Stand Alone or Integrated). Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL service (90 Integrated, 90 Stand Alone or Integrated). Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL service (180 Integrated). Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL service, Stand-Alone or Integrated. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL service for two years after reaching Proficient on the NYSESLAT. This is in addition to their regular English program. ENL teachers also push into content area subjects where the ELL students are, in order to support instruction and student learning. ENL teachers provide scaffolding of the academic content, teach academic and content specific vocabulary and concepts, and build students' English language proficiency. ENL teachers work with content area teachers to scaffold and differentiate instruction for ELL students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 51  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Five licensed ENL teachers deliver ESL instruction. Our students are provided the mandated number of instructional minutes. Students at the Entering Level receive 360 minutes of ENL (180 Stand Alone and 180 Integrated). Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL (90 Stand Alone, 180 Integrated and 90 Stand Alone or Integrated). Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL service (90 Integrated, 90 Stand Alone or Integrated). Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL service (180 Integrated). Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL service, Stand-Alone or Integrated. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL service for two years after reaching Proficient on the NYSESLAT. This is in addition to their regular English program. ENL teachers also push into content area subjects where the ELL students are, in order to support instruction and student learning. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since the Freestanding ENL program is the only model in our school, the 180/360 minutes are all provided with this model. The ELA Department utilizes the Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, Mathematics utilizes Pearson Algebra, Algebra Nation and Go Math! curriculum, Social Studies utilizes the Passport Curriculum and Science follows New York City's Scope and Sequence. Library books, textbooks and novels are provided in native languages wherever possible. We have an array of complex and compelling texts that correspond to the curriculum covered in ELA, Social Studies and Science. Additionally, our classroom libraries contain fiction and non-fiction multi-level books to support our ENL learners. We also have a selection of Native Language books for classroom libraries. Glossaries are provided for all ENL students for each major subject. 100 iPads and 4 iPad carts have been purchased for use by ELLs. Many applications have been put onto the iPads to assist ENL students. Each classroom also contains either a Promethean Board or a SmartBoard to enable teachers and students to have access to the Internet, visuals and audio. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? iPad Apps support language development and translation of curriculum and classroom assessments. Students have an opportunity to take the State Math test in their native language where applicable. Students are provided with glossaries and word to word dictionaries in each subject area and have access to them for state assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is scaffolded for ELLs in each of their content area subjects. Curriculum Maps and lesson plans contain access for all with entry points specifically designed to support ELLs. We use a variety of methodologies in content area classrooms to address ELLs specifically. Vocabulary is selected in accordance to the subject area being taught and with consideration for each childs' level of English proficiency along with necessary academic vocabulary that is used in all content areas. Teachers focus on high frequency academic words, high use words based on the content taught, big idea words, and using visual representations. Another consideration used for differentiation with ELLs is scaffolding of lessons. Teachers model for students, draw on students' prior knowledge, use visualization strategies and graphic organizers and sentence starters. Native language support is given by the use of electronic glossaries and supplying various ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science materials in native languages. Our plan for Newcomers includes partnering these students with another student that speaks the same language in order to be a support for the newcomer. Newcomers are also given the use of an iPad to assist in translation and interpretation. Guidance Counselors also monitor student social and emotional well being during this 2018-19 CEP 52  transitional period. We also provide these students with Study Island (a web based learning tool), SKEDULA (a communication tool between school and home with translation capabilities), and glossaries and iPads to be used for translation and scaffolded instruction. We will have a Saturday ELLs Academy during the 2018-2019 school year. Our plan for long term ELLs, are that teachers place a strong focus on academic vocabulary necessary for the student to succeed in all content areas. Teachers use Access for All strategies based on formative and summative data when curriculum mapping and lesson planning. Long term ELLs also participate in Study Island and are invited to attend the Saturday ELLs Academy. Former ELLs are provide with a two year continuance of ELL services (90 minutes per week and ELL accommodations). These services include continued scaffolding and support strategies when needed, as well as, a strong emphasis on writing from sources and argumentative writing. All ENL students engage in the WordGeneration academic vocabulary program. ELA teachers introduce 5-7 vocabulary words on a Monday and these words are reinforced in Math, Science and Social Studies throughout the week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Strategies that are utilized by teachers of ELL-SWDs include but are not limited to: content area vocabulary, academic vocabulary, visual representations, audio-video, visualization strategies, graphic organizers and sentence starters, in addition to recommendations made on their IEP. Students benefit from translated work in the native language and scaffolds for English language texts and classwork. Grade appropriate text from the Common Core Library is also utilized. Teachers differentiate between the needs of their ELLs, the needs of their SWDs and the needs of the students that fall into both subgroups. Study Island is also utilized as an effective web-based learning tool. Newcomers are also provided with electronic glossaries for use in all subject areas. 100 iPads and 4 iPad carts have been purchased specifically for use with our ELL population, as well as, iPad applications. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELL-SWD students are in general education classes with Special Education supports, unless otherwise noted on their IEP. We also have ELL/SWD students in the ICT class on each grade level. This ensures that students get the academic support from two licensed teachers and the ENL teacher also pushes into the class as a third teacher to support langauge. In the Stand Alone Model, the instruction is delivered strictly through the ENL teacher, whereas with Integrated ENL, instruction is delivered by both the ENL teacher and the content area teacher. It is the policy of our school to place students in the least restrictive environment wherever possible. Students are evaluated and re-evaluated throughout the year in an effort to ensure that this is taking place and to plan for future placement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We will continue to use Study Island, our web-based learning tool that helps students in kindergarten through 12th grade master state-specific, grade-level academic standards in a fun and engaging manner. Study Island provides standards-based instructional practice in ELA and Math, assessments, and productivity tools that improve the performance of educators and students via a web-based platform. All of our ELL students will be invited to attend our Saturday ELL Academy during the 2018-2019 school year. Newcomers and Intermediate ELL students are also provided with electronic glossaries and/or iPads for use in all subject areas. Students in the 8th grade take Spanish or Korean as a foreign language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Depending on the proficiency of our ENL students, we will use the Stand Alone and/or Integrated ENL models for our ELLs. We will have professional development for ENL teachers so that they can help to support our literacy across all of the content areas. We will continue to utilize Study Island and we will implement a Saturday ELLs Academy for the 2018-2019 school year. All teachers will be provided professional development by teachers who will turnkey information from workshops they have attended in support of ELLs. During the 2017-2018 school year, two ELA teachers attended the District 25 Maryann Cucchiara workshops and as a result of that work, designed two new units of study for our ENL students around those strategies and literary works. We intend to continue that work in our ELA classrooms during the 2018-2019 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 53  We do not plan on discontinuing any ELL services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all school programs. These programs include: Saturday ELLs Academy, Skedula/PupilPath, Study Island, Student Government, Debate, Safety Squad, Cheerleading, Football, Soccer, Baseball, Keyboard, Band, Chorus, Dance and Art. This year we will use our Title III allocation to hold a Saturday ELL Academy which will prepare ELLs for the NY State ELA and Math Exams, as well as, the NYSESLAT exam. A community based organization after-school program is offered to all ELLs. This program offers support in language, community building, STEM and homework help for all ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are given a copy of the class novels and Expeditionary Learning Student Workbooks in ELA and in Math they are given Pearson Algebra and Go Math! materials provided by the teacher. We provide the novels in the native language when possible. In Social Studies and Science, ELLs have access to the texts being used and in some cases have translated versions of the textbooks in addition to the English versions. ELLs are provided with dictionaries/glossaries for each content area, electronic translators are also available, as well as, iPads. iPads are pre-programmed with translation and interpretation apps. ELLs have access to Study Island, a web based program designed to support ELA and Math skills. The iPads have proved to be most helpful to ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered by classroom materials being translated, when necessary, to accommodate a student's native language while supporting current curriculum demands. Students also have use of technology to assist them in maneuvering between their native language and their English language learning. Academic vocabulary is provided in translation form in Mathematics, Science, Social Studies and ELA and through the WordGeneration curriculum.. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All resources, regardless of the subject area, correspond to the student's age and grade level. There are different curricula for each grade level/subject area. In addition, teachers utilize appropriate supporting text comparable to the student's proficiency level in an effort to scaffold towards higher level text. ENL teachers provide supplementary materials including informational texts, essay templates and lesson related visuals. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs are given a copy of the class novels and Expeditionary Learning Student Workbooks in ELA and in Math they are given Go Math! and Pearson Algebra materials provided by the teacher. We provide the novels in the native language when possible. In Social Studies and Science, ELLs have access to the texts being used and in some cases have translated versions of the textbooks in addition to the English versions. ELLs are provided with dictionaries/glossaries for each content area, electronic translators are also available, as well as, iPads. iPads are pre-programmed with translation and interpretations apps. ELLs have access to Study Island, a web based program designed to support ELA and Math skills. The iPads have proved to be most helpful to ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have an Open House in the Spring for students planning on attending I.S. 25 the following September. This event is held in the evening and is attended by our ENL teachers so that they can provide information about student expectations, curriculum and program offerings. We have translators of different languages available for use by families. Once school starts in September, we hold an orientation for parents of ELLs. It is hosted by our ENL Department and attended by the Principal, supervisor of ENL, Guidance Counselor and our Parent Coordinator. Tuesday afternoon's parent engagement time ensures that parents are able to meet with teachers and translators can be made available for these meetings. Parents are given passwords to use SKEDULA and parents can communicate with teachers and staff regarding student progress. SKEDULA offers 2018-19 CEP 54  a translation piece in which communication can be translated into the home language by the teacher and into English by a non-English speaking parent. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? I.S. 25 offers Spanish language and Korean language to our 8th grade students. We offer a Korean dual-language after-school program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? An elementary school that feeds into our school offers a dual language program in Korean. When the students enroll in our school, I.S. 25, we continue to support the students in language and writing one day per week. A Korean teacher comes into our school to work with these students. We also offer Tae Kwon Do to these students. In September 2018, we will be beginning our seventh year of collaborating with the Korean government to support Korean language students. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development takes place on Chancellor's Conference Days, during Monday afternoon PD, during team meetings and department meetings, during faculty meetings and during feedback sessions with individual teachers. We provide ongoing Professional Development on ELL strategies and methodologies, as well as, best practices. ENL and content area teachers attend professional development given by our Network, the Department of Education, as well as, by the ENL Supervisor. Academic Language and differentiation have been other areas of focus for professional development as it relates to ELLs. Scaffolding, conferencing, increasing accountable talk strategies, questioning and discussion, engagement and a book study (Leaders of Their Own Learning) are all areas for professional development planned for this year. During the 2017-2018 school year, 2 teachers attended the MaryAnn Cucchiara District 25 Cohort for ENL Instruction. As part of this cohort, the teachers developed a unit of study for ELA in grades 7 and 8. We plan to continue this work within our school building during the 2018-2019 school year. These teachers will serve as lab sites for colleagues to visit as a model for their own instruction. In addition to the Professional Development listed above, ELA teachers and ENL teachers have received and continue to receive professional development regarding the Expeditionary Learning curriculum and all of its learning targets, protocols and assessments, as well as, access to that curriculum for ENL students. Math and ENL teachers continue to receive professional development regarding Algebra For All and Go Math!, as well as, supplements to the curriculum. Science and ENL teachers have received and will continue to receive professional development regarding the Science Scope and Sequence. In addition, Social Studies and ENL teachers will continue to receive training in the Social Studies Passport Curriculum. ENL teachers are provided with copies of the different curricula in addition to novels and supplementary materials in order for them to plan scaffolds for students and to collaborate with cooperating teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 55  Our guidance counselors work with ELL students that are transitioning into middle school from elementary school and also preparing middle school ELLs for high school. New students are given a partner in their class that speaks the same language from the start so that new students are not on their own and have a buddy to familiarize them with the school and its programs. Guidance Counselors and ENL teachers also closely monitor students' transition into the new environment. Professional Development takes place on Chancellor's Conference Days, during Monday afternoon PD, during team meetings and department meetings, during faculty meetings and during feedback sessions with individual teachers. We provide ongoing Professional Development on ELL strategies and methodologies, as well as, best practices. ENL and content area teachers attend professional development given by our Network, the Department of Education, as well as, by the ENL Supervisor. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We offer between three and four meetings per year for our ELL parents. We had our first orientation meeting for parents of new ELLs on Thursday, September 20, 2018. We held one meeting during the day and one meeting in the evening. The Principal, Supervisor of ENL, the Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors were in attendance. We offered email addresses of school staff to the parents and always involve our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Trotter, in all activities for the parents of ELL students. Any materials given out at the meeting were provided in the parents' preferred language. We offered translators at the initial meeting and offer translators at our Parent Teacher Conference days. Materials are also sent home to parents in as many languages as possible. We also provide parent trainings regarding Skedula/PupilPath. ELL parents are encouraged to participate in monthly PTA meetings and are welcome to serve on the School Leadership Team. ELL parents, as well as, all parents are welcomed every Tuesday of the school year to meet with teachers and other school staff and the school provides a translator to assist at these meetings. Additionally, ENL teachers conduct phone conferences when necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a PTA meeting every month that parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend and participate in. ELL parents are also encouraged to become part of the School Leadership Team. During the 2017-2018 school year, we had many parent involvement activities such as STEM Night, Ice Skating and Career Day. Our peer collaborative teacher, parent coordinator and our Guidance Counselors will also hold parent information sessions regarding the different curricula, the Next Generation Learning Standards, and PupilPath and Social Emotional Learning. We will also have a High School Information Night. We enlist the assistance of translators whenever necessary to accommodate the language needs of our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maryellen Beirne, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Adrien Block School DBN: 25Q025 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) MaryEllen Beirne Title Principal Nancy DePoalo Assistant Principal Jacquelyn Trotter Parent Coordinator JiEun Lee ENL/Bilingual Teacher Petroula Siouti Parent Lisa Chin Donna Ituarte Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Daniel Flaxman School Counselor Danielle DiMango Maria Rozos Vasiliou Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Donna Gravesande Other Teacher/UFT Chair Gail Steinman Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 10/10/18 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q025 School Name: Adrien Block I.S. 25 Superintendent: D. Dimango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacquelyn Trotter Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An assessment of Adrien Block I.S. 25's written and oral translation needs was done by utilizing the RCPL Report from ATS, as well as, using the Home Language Identification Survey provided by the Department of Education. The survey comes in many languages and is given to all students (General Education, Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners) for parents to fill out. Communication between school and home is also translated into high frequency languages. We use SKEDULA (an online parent communication tool) that is able to translate communication back and forth between home and school. In addition, we send home parent notices and vital information that is translated into our high frequency home languages. We provide translators for Parent Teacher Nights and school events. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Cham 1 3 0 0.06 0.19 0 1 3 1 Chinese (any) 421 26.13 337 Cantonese Dari/Farsi/Persian Greek German Korean Mandarin English Pilipino Polish Portugese Russian Spanish Telugu Tigre Thai Tibetan Urdu Vietnamese N/A N/A N/A 0 1 3 2 131 0 868 0 1 2 1 165 1 0 3 1 6 1 N/A N/A N/A 0 0.06 0.19 0.12 8.13 0 53.88 0 0.06 0.12 0.06 10.24 0.06 0 0.19 0.06 0.37 0.06 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 60 0.06 0.19 0.06 20.92 0.37 0.06 0.25 0.12 8.26 5.52 52.58 0.06 0.12 0.12 0.06 6 1 4 2 133 89 847 1 2 2 1 168 10.43 1 1 3 1 6 1 N/A N/A N/A 0.06 0.06 0.19 0.06 0.37 0.06 N/A N/A N/A  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents that our school typically translates include but are not limited to: Newsletters, blue cards, school notices, Testing Calendar, Monthly Calendars, Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, PTA communication, High School Directories. PTA Meetings are held monthly, calendars are distributed monthly, newsletters and announcements are distributed on an as needed basis. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We utilize staff members to support our translating needs, as well as, utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit Our school utilizes SKEDULA/PupilPath for communication between home and school. This online tool enables communication to be translated into English and other languages. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide We hold an Open House every September for all students. We also hold an ENL Open House every September, Parent-Teacher Night three times per year, and we have face-to-face meetings every Tuesday from 2:30-3:30. The IEP teacher, Guidance Counselors, the Parent-Teacher- twice per year Parent Engagement- every Tuesday afternoon interpretation service(s)? We use an interpretation vendor in November, March and May during Parent-Teacher Conferences. Throughout the school year, the Parent Coordinator decides, along with the Principal, the materials that need to be translated into multiple languages. The Parent Coordinator takes the 2018-19 CEP 61  Dean and Assistant Principals also hold formal and informal meetings with parents as needed. In every case, we ensure that a translator is present when necessary. Disciplinary/Guidance Meetings- as needed responsibility to ask a parent to support us in the language in which they speak, to assist in translating parent documents. We are also piloting the use of a Personal Auditory Assistance System Teachers also use the Translation and Interpretation Services Unit to assist in communicating with parents. Teachers, students and families utilize SKEDULA/PupilPath in order to communicate with one another. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will prepare translated statements (written and verbal) through the use of the Translation and Interpretation unit, as well as, utilize the services of our current staff as translators. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Teachers will be familiarized with Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through distribution to teachers as part of their professional learning at the start of the school year and memorialized as an addendum in their Teacher's Handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 62  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have brochures and pamphlets translated in multiple languages in our Parent Coordinator's office. In addition, we have a poster near the front entrance of the school that indicates parents' rights to communication from the school in their home language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will send out a Parent Survey via e-mail and backpacked to students to evaluate our translation and interpretation services. We will also discuss this at furture PTA meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings. 2018-19 CEP 63 
