2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q026 School Name: P.S. 026 RUFUS KING Principal: ANDREW PECORELLA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information 26Q026 342600010026 Prek-5 School Number (DBN): 26Q026 195-02 69 th Avenue, Fresh Meadows, NY 11365 718-464-4505 718-464-4644 Phone Number: Fax: Andrew Pecorella apecore@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Andrew Pecorella Bonnie Wilson Francisco Mateo Andrew Pecorella N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)631-6943 Phone Number: (718)631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens Plaza North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrew Pecorella Bonnie Wilson Francisco Mateo Michael DeBlasio ChrysantheGeorgatos Caitlin Grimaldi *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Elected CSA Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kate Marigliano Steven Koines NideVillanueva YaelGeorgescu Oliver Scarlett ManoelaMcGovern WaleskaOcasio Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: The mission of P.S. 26 is to provide a nurturing environment in which all children learn. Teachers, parents, students and community work collaboratively in order to actively achieve the goal TEAM 26 – Together Everyone Achieves More. We differentiate curriculum and instruction strategies so that all students will meet or exceed the Next Generation Learning Standards. We provide an environment which is conducive to learning the skills necessary for the 21st Century. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Rufus King Elementary is a Pre-K-Grade 5 school located in Fresh Meadows serving approximately 711 students. Our enrollment is comprised of students with varying ethnic, racial, socio-economic, and educational backgrounds. The school population includes 63% Asian, 8% Black, 16% Hispanic and 11% White students. Our average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 95%. P.S.224, a District 75 program comprised of students with moderate to severe disabilities, is co-located within our building. STRATEGIC COLLABORATIONS & INITIATIVES Special Initiatives · Full-Day Universal Pre-K program · STEAM Initiative · Tuesday Parent Engagement Workshops · Partnership with Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Workshop Project · Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports program · Adult ESL program offered to community members · The After School Corporation YMCA · School Beautification Initiative · The Green Team Initiative · Afters school Music program (Piano, Guitar, Vocals) · After school Technology program · After school Public Speaking program · The March of Dimes Wonder Walk · Mighty Milers student program · “Cookies, Carrots and Conversation” (K-5 Participation) ·“Who, What, Where, When, Why and Waffles” – Pre-Kindergarten 2018-19 CEP 10  ·“Coffee and Conversation” (Parent Participation) Strategic Collaborations With the goal of expanding our range and quality of services, we have collaborated with several New York City programs to enlist their expertise. · Alley Pond Environmental Center · New York Public Library · Office of Adult and Continuing Education · The After School Corporation Jamaica YMCA · The Green Team · American Heart Association · The March of Dimes Foundation · New York Road Runners Club · City Harvest · Ronald McDonald House New York 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body at P.S.26Q includes representation of target subgroups including 12% English language learners and 19% Students with Disabilities. 2. We have several school-wide programs to meet the specific learning needs of these students including:  ENL program: Our ELL population in grades K-5 receive ENL services taught by dual-certified ENL teachers.   Integrated Co-Teaching: We have an ICT class on each grade level. Self-contained Special Education: We have one 12:1:1 Special Education class for grades K- 1, one 12:1 Special Education class for grades 2-3, one 12:1 Special Education class for grades 4-5. Special Education Teacher Support Services: SETSS is provided to students in grades K-5 who require additional academic support to meet grade level expectations.   Related Services: We provide Speech and Language services, Occupational therapy,Physical therapy and Counseling to students requiring related services as indicated on their Individualized Education Plans.  Academic Intervention Services: Academic Intervention Services for ELA and Math are provided to students in grades K-5. These students have been identified through the use of New York State assessment scores, as well as through teacher referrals to our School Implementation Team. At PS 26Q, the need to provide access to the Least Restrictive Environment for our self-contained, integrated co-teaching, and SETSS special education students was identified across all grades. It is our goal to review each child's Individualized Education Program and ensure that proper placement and flexibility occurs. 2018-19 CEP 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Supportive Environment: Social Emotional Learning Initiative During the 2017-2018 school year, several structures were collaboratively implemented with a focus on promoting the social and emotional development of all students within a safe, equitable and positive learning environment.  Children First Always Meetings o School administrators utilized " Children First Always" (CFA) meetings to collaborate with grade level teams throughout the month to troubleshoot and support any areas of concern for each grade.  Cookies, Carrots and Conversation o School administrators conduct monthly meetings with students in grades Pre-K through 5 in which meaningful feedback is elicited and students are engaged in reciprocal sharing of ideas surrounding school improvement.  Sanford Harmony o Students were engaged in CCLS aligned lessons with a target goal of encouraging student cooperation, empathy and mutual respect, as well as fostering greater inclusion and connectedness.  PBIS o P.S.26 has successfully implemented a collaborative school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS) system with a focus on reinforcing positive behaviors. Students are offered reward incentives based on a “cougar cash” system for those exhibiting safe, responsible, respectful and caring actions.  RULER o P.S.26 participated in Yale’s Center for Emotional Intelligence, RULER training, which is an evidence-based approach for integrating social and emotional learning into schools. Staff received targeted professional learning surrounding creating a supportive and positive school climate based on the tenets of RULER- recognizing, understanding, labeling, expressing and regulating emotions. Additionally, anchor tools such as the Mood Meter and Meta-Moment are infused throughout the school community to empower students, staff and families to build skills that cultivate emotional intelligence and create a supportive and positive school climate. P.S.26’s SEL initiative has led to an increase in the percentage of positive teacher responses since 2015 within Supportive Environment of the Framework for Great Schools as evidenced by the following data from the teacher response section of P.S. 26’s NYC School Surveys: Adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. (Q21f)  2015-2016: 47% of teachers  2016-2017: 83% of teachers  2017-2018: 97% of teachers 2018-19 CEP 12  Adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). (Q21g)  2015-2016: 40% of teachers  2016-2017: 93% of teachers  2017-2018: 97% of teachers Our desired accomplishment is to integrate the values from our PBIS program and SEL initiatives into the everyday curriculum with the purpose of nurturing and sustaining a culture of collaboration, trust, rigorous instruction and high expectations for the entire P.S. 26 school community. Rigorous Instruction: STEAM Initiative During the 2017-2018 school year, a collaborative and comprehensive STEAM initiative inclusive of the application of best instructional practices and use of authentic assessments was implemented school-wide. With a shared vision and intensive focus on enhancing student engagement, students in grades K-2 were immersed in at least one grade specific STEAM project and students in grades 3-5 completed two grade specific STEAM projects. The success of implementing STEAM based learning experiences that focused on encouraging student thinking, enthusiasm and perseverance is evidenced through the use of the following data:  Through data analysis for the 2016-2017 school year, P.S.26Q's teachers' ratings in component 3C: Engaging Students in Learning of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, a gap was identified between the overall percentage of Effective teacher ratings (66%) and overall percentage of Highly Effective teacher ratings (28%).  An area of focus was to further the implementation of the STEM program within indicator 2.1 Academic Rigor and Instructional Quality as evidenced by one improved area of the continuum from EMERGING into the area of INTEGRATED, which is defined as: o A culture of inquiry, engineering design and practice, innovation, and risk-taking exists in many classrooms (including with students). Instruction is often student-centered, and most students are able to clearly articulate the purpose and content of their work. Teaching practices are aligned to the school's STEM mission, vision, and expectations in most STEM classrooms.  The focus for increasing student engagement was measured by a 5% increase in teachers' ratings of component 3C of the Danielson Framework for Teaching.  P.S.26Q exceeded the goal of an overall 5% positive increase of Highly Effective teacher ratings for 2017-2018 school year within component 3C: Engaging Students in Learning of the Danielson Framework for Teaching was achieved.  A 13% increase was achieved in the overall percentage of Highly Effective teacher ratings within component 3C: o 2016-2017: 28% o 2017-2018: 41% Our desired accomplishment is to continue to move along the STEM Framework continuum in the implementation of rigorous instruction aligned to STEAM education that promotes student centered inquiry and problem-based 2018-19 CEP 13  learning.. As stated in the STEM Framework, “interdisciplinary forms of exploration are compelling, as they promote student engagement, agency, advocacy, and learning.” Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Partnership  During the 2017-2018 school year, P.S.26’s full partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project further supported teachers’ professional growth and capacity to impact student achievement with a focus on increasing academic rigor.  The positive impact that the TCRWP initiative has had on our students’ literacy skills in grades K-5 can be evidenced in the following data: o 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q026 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 709 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 37 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 61.1% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 16.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 2% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 68.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 77 75 94.8% 6.9% 16.4% 7.8% 62.9% 2.3% 2 2% 5.2 70.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According the P.S. 26’s School Quality Guide for 2017-2018, P.S. 26’s strengths in the area of Rigorous Instruction include but are not limited to the following: Common Core Shifts in Literacy 100% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. (Q16b) 100% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. (Q16c) 100% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with academic language. (Q16d) Common Core Shifts in Math 100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resources to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. (Q17a) 100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resource to link the standards from previous grades to current grade so student knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts. (Q17b) 100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resources to develop students’ conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context. (Q17c) Based on a data analysis of teachers’ Advance ratings and P.S. 26’s School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 a priority need was identified in the area of rigorous instruction related to component 3b, Questioning and Discussion of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for teaching.  According to P.S. 26’s School Quality Guide for 2017-2018, 74% of teachers articulated that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion. (Q19a)  According the P.S. 26’s Advance teacher ratings----% of teachers were rated as “Highly Effective” within component area 3B of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 16  According to P.S. 26’s Advance reports for 2017-2018, component 3b was rated 171 total times with only 63 of them (36.63%) being rated as “Highly Effective”.  o Component 3b: Questioning and Discussion (171 Total Ratings)  o Highly Effective: 36.63% - 63 ratings o Effective: 60.47% - 104 ratings o Developing: 2.33% - 4 ratings According to P.S. 26’s Advance reports for 2017-2018, only 30.23% of teachers were rated “Highly Effective” in component 3b of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. Through a data analysis of PS 26's Advance Reports for 2017-2018, a gap was identified in teachers' ratings in component 3B: Questioning and Discussion of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Based on 171 total ratings, component 3b was rated at the Effective level 104 times (60.47%) and at the Highly Effective level 63 times teacher (36.63%) for the 2017-2018 school year. PS 26Q has initiated steps to implement school-wide structures for the 2018-2019 school year that will support teachers in implementing strategies that increase students’ ability to build upon their classmates’ ideas during classroom conversations across grades K-5. In addition, structures that support our desired accomplishments of further defining, implementing and sustaining “Highly Effective” practices within all classrooms K-5 as stated by Charlotte Danielson will also be created. Some of these practices include but are not limited to: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, there will be a 5% overall increase in teachers' highly effective Advance ratings in component 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching as measured by a 5% overall positive increase in teachers’ highly effective Advance ratings in component 3b of the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration and teachers will engage in professional learning opportunities to support the implementation of best practices focused on supporting students’ ability to build on each other's ideas during class discussions. Administration will ensure common preparation periods for teachers in order to facilitate collaborative teacher planning, including developing best instructional practices and strategies for SWDs and ELLs to engage students in learning and promote growth for all students. Intensive training for staff will be provided with a focus on component 3b of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. Professional learning opportunities will be continuous and reflective of the activities supported in component 3b based on student needs and teacher feedback. All teachers in grades K-5 will implement teaching strategies that support students’ ability to build on each other's ideas during class discussions. Newsletters will be sent home monthly informing parents of rigorous learning targets including essential questions, learning outcomes in the content areas, questions to ask the child at home, and key vocabulary terms. Families will be informed of current practices in regard to the STEM Framework and our school-wide STEM implementation. Parent workshops focused on our school's STEM initiative will be provided to parents during PS 26's Parent Engagement designated times. This will encourage parent participation, understanding, and communication. Teachers will participate in positive learning walks and intervisitations facilitated by school administration in order to share best practices and provide support to colleagues across grades K-5. Teachers K-5, students K-5, SWDs, ELLs September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers, PreK-5 students, SWDs, ELLs September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teacher K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, staff developers Parents/Families September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers PreK-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Related Service Providers, Administration Administration will continue to meet with each grade to troubleshoot and support any areas of concern for each Students with Disabilities, ELLs September 2018-2019 Teachers, Administration 2018-19 CEP 18  grade. In addition, administration will be meeting monthly with all ENL teachers, as well as the Special Education teachers in order for teachers to share the strategies being implemented for the ELL and SWD populations in our school. These meetings will serve to progress monitor students within these specific areas of need and provide support to teachers in adjusting their instructional practices to effectively meet the needs of their students. Strategies and outcomes will be shared and turn-keyed to the entire staff to continue to foster a supportive, cohesive learning environment. and high-need student subgroups, PK-5 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will partner with teachers from PS 26's Parent Engagement Team to implement hands-on parent workshops with a focus on component 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. These workshops will be implemented throughout the 2018-2019 school year and will focus on increasing students’ abilities to build upon others’ ideas while engaged in conversation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Positive Learning Walks  Grade level common preps  Professional Development Committee  Parental workshops  Pre and post observation meetings  Additional district-wide STEM professional developments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In order to monitor student progress, by February 2018, there will be a 2.5% increase in teachers' Highly Effective ratings of component 3B of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The progression and success of this goal will be measured using data gathered from analyzing teachers' present levels of performance within component 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Specifically, teachers' individual 2018-19 CEP 19  numerical and HEDI average component scores for component 3b from the Teacher Performance Overview section of NYC DOE Advance Reports will be assessed to gauge progress and to inform future professional development and/or peer visitations. Based on data from NYC DOE Advance reports, professional learning sessions and peer visitations across grades K-5 will be designed according to teachers' individual strengths and areas of need. These visitations will include all teachers in grades K-5 and provide opportunities for teachers and administration to observe, discuss, evaluate and implement best practices related to component 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Peer visitations and PLOs will also provide teachers with the time needed to reflect upon their new learning related to component 3b, to assess the impact of their professional learning on their students and their pedagogy and to plan and prepare the implementation of new ideas and/or strategies into their respective classrooms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Leadership Team conducted a comprehensive assessment in identifying areas of need regarding our students’ social emotional learning skills. The School Leadership Team (SLT) created a Student Frustration Survey (SFS) for all students Pre-K through Grade 5, to rank their ability in handling frustrating situations. Students were asked to rank three different areas; the classroom, lunch/recess and home. The students identified their self-management skills by plotting on a scale. The scale is numbered 0-10, 0 being defined as the students cannot handle their frustrations in an appropriate way, or at all, and 10 being defined as the students can always handle frustrating situations appropriately. Based on the data collected:  50% of students said that they are able to manage frustrating situations appropriately at a level 8 or higher within the classroom  46% of students said that they are able to manage frustrating situations appropriately at a level 8 or higher at lunch or recess As per the Student Frustration Survey, there is a need to increase student management of frustrating situations within the classroom and lunch/recess. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in Pre-K – 5 students ranking level 8 or higher regarding their ability to manage frustrating situations within the areas of classroom and lunch/recess, as measured by the Student Frustration Survey (SFS). 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Pre-K through 5 teachers will be provided ongoing, interactive Sanford Harmony training during designated Professional Learning Opportunity (PLO) Mondays throughout the 2018-2019 school year. PLOs will focus on promoting academic and social awareness with an increase in student ability to take on challenging tasks and situations, as well as the skills to manage their frustrations appropriately. Common prep periods for teachers will be scheduled in order to facilitate collaboration among teachers for planning the implementation of lessons and strategies that will increase student ability to manage their frustrations. Administration will meet with all students to discuss ways to improve the schools environment, school facilities, and classroom instruction that allow for students to appropriately display and manage their frustrations. Students will be provided an opportunity to share with administration how they feel the implementation of the Sanford Harmony/ SEL program is helping students manage their frustration levels with periodic “Cookies, Carrots, and Conversation” meetings. Student of the Month awards will be aligned to the five CASEL competencies and elements of the Sanford Harmony program in order to promote positive behaviors when managing frustrating or difficult situations. Teacher led workshops will provide parents with an opportunity to understand SEL and the Sanford Harmony program and the drive to increase students’ ability to manage frustrating tasks or situations Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PreK-5 Teachers,students, including September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Related Service Providers, Administration, Staff Developers Students with Disabilities, ELLs and high-need student subgroups PreK-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Students in Grades PreK – 5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration PK-5 Teachers, September 2018-2019 Teachers, Administration Students in grades PreK – 5 PreK - 5 teachers, September 2018-2019 Teacher, Administration PreK - 5 students, Administration All students will continue to participate in monthly Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) assemblies facilitated by the PBIS team. The PBIS team will incorporate aspects of the Sanford Harmony program in presentations and in the PreK-5 Teachers,September 2018-2019 Teachers, Administration 2018-19 CEP 22 recognition and distribution of incentive awards for students exhibiting positive school behavior. The development and implementation of Behavior Intervention Plans for Students with Disabilities will be aligned to the components of the PBIS system and Sanford Harmony program. students, including Students with Disabilities, ELLs and high-need student subgroups Positive reinforcement and behavior management techniques will be further implemented through the use of visual displays to support ELL students in the application of classroom and school-wide management systems. PreK-5 Teachers,students, including September 2018-2019 Teachers, Administration Students with Disabilities, ELLs and high-need student subgroups 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and teachers will provide parent workshops with a focus on social emotional learning that will be implemented throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony Professional Learning and tool kits   Monthly PTA Meetings  Monthly PBIS Assemblies   Students in grades K-5 will participate in "Carrots, Cookies and Conversation" meetings with administration Students in pre-k will participate in " Who, What, Where, When, Why and Waffles" meetings with administration School-wide system for collecting data School website    Common preparation periods for teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  By February 2019, all students in grades Pre-K – 5 will complete a middle of the year SFS (Student Frustration Survey) with results indicating at least a 5% increase in students ability to manage their frustrations at a level 8 or higher on a scale from 0 – 10 both in the classroom and at lunch/recess. The results would indicate at least 55% in the classroom and 51% during lunch/recess Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. All students in grades Pre-K – 5 will complete a middle of the year SFS (Student Frustration Survey) to determine adequate progress to attaining this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Leadership Team conducted a comprehensive assessment in identifying areas of need regarding our students’ social emotional learning skills. With a focus on moving students to higher levels of independent self-regulation of positive behaviors exhibited within the classroom, the School Implementation Team utilized data from the 2017-2018 Advance rating system identifying component 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport as an area for improvement. The overall teacher rating for this component was 89%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, (to promote mutual respect, empathy, and improve student cooperation) there will be a 5% increase in teachers' highly effective Advance ratings in Component 2A on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will provide targeted professional learning opportunities in order for staff to collaboratively plan instruction based on the needs of all learners that will engage all students to work cooperatively with partner(s) across all academic areas. Teachers Prek-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, TC Staff Developers, Teachers Teachers will be provided with a minimum of two common preparation periods to work collaboratively to monitor student progress towards creating positive learning environments throughout all classrooms. Teachers will participate in Positive Learning Environment Walks to allow for same grade level and vertical classroom intervisitations to share best practices and receive actionable feedback from peers around problems of practice related to targeted populations (ENLs, SWDs, bottom third, top third). Teachers PreK - 5, September 2018 - Teachers, Administration, Students PreK - 5 Teachers Pre-K - 5, June 2019 September 2018 - Teachers, Administration, Students Pre-K - 5 June 2019 Teachers in Grades PreK-5 will implement at least two integrated Sanford Harmony lessons per month. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and teachers will provide parent workshops with a focus on social emotional learning that will be implemented throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Positive Learning Walks  Grade level common preps  Grade level meetings with administrators  Professional Development Committee 2018-19 CEP 26   Parental workshops  Additional district-wide SELprofessional developments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 2.5% overall positive increase in teachers’ highly effective Advance ratings in component 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport of the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress of this goal will be measured using the Advance ratings, specifically component 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport of the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Leadership Team conducted a comprehensive needs assessment of highly effective behavior management practices implemented school-wide. According to P.S. 26’s Advance reports for 2017-2018, component 2d: Managing Student Behavior of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching was rated 172 total times.  151 Highly Effective (88%)  19 Effective (11%)  1 Developing (1%) As indicated in the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching within Domain 2: The Classroom Environment, Component 2d: Managing Student Behavior, “In order for students to be able to engage deeply with content, the classroom environment must be orderly; the atmosphere must feel business-like and productive, without being authoritarian. In a productive classroom, standards of conduct are clear to students; they know what they are permitted to do and what they can expect of their classmates. Even when their behavior is being corrected, students feel respected; their dignity is not undermined. Skilled teachers regard positive student behavior not as an end in itself, but as a prerequisite to high levels of engagement in content.” Indicators for Highly Effective practice • Clear standards of conduct, possibly posted, and possibly referred to during a lesson • Absence of acrimony between teacher and students concerning behavior • Teacher awareness of student conduct • Preventive action when needed by the teacher • Absence of misbehavior • Reinforcement of positive behavior 2018-19 CEP 28  As a means to build every student’s ability to become an effective self-manager; socially, emotionally and behaviorially, we will empower teachers to implement highly effective behavior management practices. The ultimate goal is to promote student independence in taking active roles to monitor and regulate their own behavior and that of their peers against standards of conduct developed collaboratively. According to Charlotte Danielson (2007), “although most teachers can articulate their approach to standards of conduct, implementation is critical. In a well-managed classroom, students themselves will be able to explain the agreed-upon standards of conduct.” Students engaged in an activity that required them to reflect upon their self-management skills by plotting on a scale. The scale ranged form 0 to 10 with 0 being defined as the students cannot handle their frustrations in an appropriate way, or at all, and 10 being defined as the students can always handle frustrating situations appropriately. Based on the data collected:  50% of students said that they are able to manage frustrating situations appropriately at a level 8 or higher within the classroom  46% of students said that they are able to manage frustrating situations appropriately at a level 8 or higher at lunch or recess As per the Student Frustration Survey, there is a need to increase student management of frustrating situations within the classroom and lunch/recess. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an overall positive increase of 7% in teachers' highly effective Advance ratings in Component 2D of the Danielson Framework of Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Within Initial Planning Conferences with teachers, school administrators will effectively communicate and gain feedback surrounding high expectations that target three elements of managing student behavior including setting expectations, monitoring behavior and responding to misbehavior with the intent of creating a classroom atmosphere that is orderly and productive. In collaboration with the Professional Development Committee, five professional learning opportunities will be scheduled for within the PD calendar. Intensive teacher led training for staff will be provided with a focus on the three elements of component 2d: Managing Student Behavior within Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. A collaborative SEL team will be developed to plan and/or facilitate targeted professional learning opportunities based on teacher input and identified needs. The SEL team will continuously monitor the impact of professional learning and support teaching staff as needed. School administrators will continue to meet with students on a monthly basis to gain their feedback regarding the school environment, school facilities and classroom instruction. Students in the following grades will be engaged in meaningful discussions with school administrators:  Pre-K: “Who, What, Where, When, Why and Waffles”  K-5: “Cookies, Carrots and Conversation” Administration will ensure common preparation periods for teachers in order to facilitate collaborative teacher planning, including developing best instructional practices and strategies for managing student behavior of all students within the classroom and throughout the school environment. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre-K – 5 teachers September 2018 Teachers, Administrators Pre-K – 5 teachers, September 2018 – June 2019 Students (including SWDs and ENLs) Pre-K – 5 teachers Teachers, Related Service Providers, Administration, Staff Developers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Related Service Providers, Administration, Staff Developers Students in Grades September 2018 – Teachers, Administration Pre-K – 5 June 2019 (including SWDs and ENL students) Pre-K – 5 teachers September 2018- Teachers, Administrators June 2019 2018-19 CEP 30 Administration will facilitate at least 5 SEL PL opportunities for teachers in grades PK-5 with a focus on improving component 2D. Families will be engaged in workshops with a focus on social emotional learning to strengthen the link between home and school. Teachers, Families September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers Families Administration Parent Coordinator Pre-K – 5 Teachers, All students (including ENL and SWD) September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers Administration, PBIS Team, School Based Support Team Teachers will meet with parents during Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays and monthly newsletters will be sent home to engage parents in their child’s social emotional learning and share best practices and ideas as to how they can best support their children at home. The Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) will continue to be implemented school-wide. All students will participate in monthly PBIS and Social Emotional Learning assemblies. “Cougar Cash” will be given to students who display one or more elements of positive behavior: safe, responsible, respectful and caring. In collaboration with our School-Based Support Team and PTA, students will redeem rewards in the school store for cougar cash. Students exceeding school behavior standards will be celebrated at assemblies by receiving “cub of the month” awards. Behavior intervention plans and behavior management incentive charts will be developed in accordance with the elements of P.S.26’s Cougar Code. Positive reinforcement and behavior management strategies will be implemented through the use of visual displays to support our ELL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and teachers will collaborate to provide parent workshops with a focus on social emotional learning that will be implemented throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 31   Grade level common preparation periods  Grade level meetings with school administrators  Professional Development committee     PBIS and SEL assemblies Family workshops Social Emotional Learning Team Intensive Social Emotional Learning Professional Learning Opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 3.5% increase in teachers' overall Highly Effective ratings in component 2d: Managing Student Behavior on the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The effectiveness of targeted professional learning opportunities and the progression towards meeting this this goal will be measured using the Charlotte Danielson Rubric with a focus on the highly effective practices aligned to component 2d: Managing Student Behavior. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 26 invited the parent community to seventeen parent engagement workshops during the 2018-2019 school year. These various workshops were facilitated by teacher teams and administration. The workshops provided opportunities for families to learn about and participate in a plethora of subject areas including social emotional learning, growth mindset, mastering mathematics, Teachers College reading and writing, STEAM, Passport Social Studies, NYS Testing, portfolio making, Thinking Maps, ENL, PBIS, physical education, summer reading and a music celebration. Based on P.S. 26’s 2017-2018 "School Quality Guide" 93% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance (Q4b) 95% of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes. (Q4c) 96% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 97% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 97% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d) 98% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b) Based on data from P.S. 26’s last Quality Review from 2015-2016 the school received a score of 4.99 and a Quality Review Rating of “Well Developed based on the criteria of: How effectively does the school partner with families to support student success? (3.4) Based on P.S. 26’s School Quality report for the 2017-2018 school year, we have identified the need to provide additional opportunities for families to observe instruction, volunteer their time and participate in activities with their child. A data analysis from the School Quality report for the 2017-2018 indicated the following: 2018-19 CEP 33  85% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 82% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) P.S. 26 invited the parent community to seventeen parent engagement workshops during the 2018-2019 school year. These various workshops were facilitated by teacher teams and administration. The workshops provided opportunities for families to learn about and participate in a plethora of subject areas including social emotional learning, growth mindset, mastering mathematics, Teachers College reading and writing, STEAM, Passport Social Studies, NYS Testing, portfolio making, Thinking Maps, ENL, PBIS, physical education, summer reading and a music celebration. Based on P.S. 26’s 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 93% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance (Q4b) 95% of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes. (Q4c) 96% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 97% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 97% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d) 98% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b) Based on data from P.S. 26’s last Quality Review from 2015-2016 the school received a score of 4.99 and a Quality Review Rating of “Well Developed based on the criteria of: How effectively does the school partner with families to support student success? (3.4) Based on P.S. 26’s School Quality report for the 2017-2018 school year, we have identified the need to provide additional opportunities for families to observe instruction, volunteer their time and participate in activities with their child. A data analysis from the School Quality report for the 2017-2018 indicated the following: 85% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 2018-19 CEP 34  82% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of families stating that they have opportunities to visit their child's classroom, observe instruction or participate in an activity with their child on the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Families will be invited to participate in 8 different "Family Fridays" with a focus on supporting our students' social, emotional and academic success. All Parents/Guardians September 2018-June 2019: ongoing Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator. P.S. 26 will also offer free ESL classes for adult family members. Additionally, parent workshops based on social emotional learning, growth mindset, mastering mathematics, Teachers College reading and writing, STEAM, Passport Social Studies, NYS Testing, Thinking Maps, ENL, PBIS, physical education, summer reading and music will be offered to the school community. Ensure communication of school and community events, newsletters, calendars, through correspondence (ex; emailing, distribution lists, sending information home with students, school and Parent Teacher Association (PTA) websites, and the implementation of school messenger system). School community will maintain regular contact with families regarding student progress including communication in the home school notebook. Providing Interpretation services to families and students for Parent Teacher meetings/conferences and orientations. Regularly meeting with PTA Executive Board and hosting “Coffee and Conversation with Administration”. Sharing information and understanding of the NYC Survey assessment. Parents will participate in all school events: Gym night, Field day, Harvest Fall Festival, Walk-a-thons, Book Fairs, International Night, Cultural Days, School dances, Movie Night, Jump Rope for Heart, Mighty Milers, School trips and Senior Day. Staff, parents and students will implement All Parents/Guardians Weekly Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers/staff and webmaster. Parents identified by ATS RAPL home language survey Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator. All Parents/Guardians Monthly Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, staff. 2018-19 CEP 36 Teachers PK-5, Administration, Families September 2018-2019 Administration, Teachers Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) with incentives to the program being supported by the PS26Q PTA. Administration will continue to utilize " Children First Always" (C.F.A.) meetings meet with each grade level team throughout the month to troubleshoot and support any areas of concern for each grade. In addition, administration will be meeting monthly with all ENL teachers and teachers of all ENL classes as well as the Special Education teachers to improve upon and share the strategies they have in place for the ELL and SWD populations in our school. These meeting will serve to progress monitor and track students in these specific areas of need and to see what adjustments can be made to further support these students. Strategies and outcomes will be shared and turn-keyed to the rest of the staff to help build a more supportive, cohesive learning environment. These strategies and outcomes that are discussed will help to decrease the gap of understanding between staff members and families. Any extra support given from administration to staff always trickles down to students and families creating a more supportive environment. Administration and the "Parent Engagement Team" will create and offer various parent workshops throughout the school year during "Parent Engagement Tuesdays". Teachers PK-5, Administration, Families September 2018-2019 Administration, Teachers These workshops will open lines of communication and make the home to school connections for our students and parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the parent coordinator will partner with PS 26's "Parent Engagement Team" to implement parent workshops with a focus on providing families with additional opportunities to observe instruction, volunteer their time and participate in activities with their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Social Workers, Translations and Interpretations services, all classroom teachers Pre-k-5, Cluster teachers, staff members, and parent volunteers, calendar of events, flyers, parent distribution lists, school messenger, school and PTA websites, school statistic reports and attendance sheets. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 37  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% (4 out of 8) of the "Family Friday" parent workshops will be provided. These workshops will include all classrooms from Pre-K through grade five. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progression and success of this goal will be measured using "exit slips" and "reflection surveys" from all parent workshops and "Family Fridays". *Evidence of collaboration, communication, and implementation between educators and the parent community *Evidence of family engagement including but not limited to"Family Friday" outreach surveys, "Parent Engagement Tuesdays", "Glows and Grows Assessment Forms" and overall family communication. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teachers will engage in grade level inquiry work using protocol to analyze graded student work samples to identify specific needs, determine possible solutions, and assess the impact of their teaching. Any student that received a Level 1 or 2 on theNYS ELAexam. Teachers will engage in grade level inquiry work using protocol to analyze graded student work samples to identify specific needs, determine possible solutions, and assess the impact of their teaching. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Teachers will use strategies aligned to the Teachers College Units of Study in reading and Writing to encourage students to add text-based details to support answers in their written responses. through multiple resources, including Thinking maps. Teachers will implement the Teachers College workshop model and differentiate instruction as needed. Teachers will encourage students to generate their own questions that support their thinking as well as challenge their classmates’ ideas. In order to focus on students’ problem solving skills, teachers in grades K-5 will implement Math Exemplars to supplement the My Math Curriculum. Pre-assessments will be utilized on a Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, the Title Ibefore and after-school programs will provide services for ELL students in grades 1-5 and the lowest performing students in grades 4 and 5, including Students with Disabilities Small group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 39 Small Group During the school day Small group During the school day Science Any student that received a Level 1 or 2 on the NYS MATH exam. Teachers will engage in grade level inquiry work using protocol to analyze graded student work samples to identify specific needs, determine possible solutions, and assess the impact of their teaching. Social Studies Teachers will engage in grade level inquiry work using protocol to analyze graded student work samples to identify specific needs, determine possible solutions, and assess the impact of their teaching. consistent basis for each math unit across grades K-5. Teachers will use strategies to encourage students to add text-based details to support answers in their written responses through multiple resources, including Thinking maps. Teachers will implement the Teachers College workshop model and differentiate instruction as needed. Teachers will encourage students to generate their own questions that support their thinking as well as challenge their classmates’ ideas. Teachers will use strategies to encourage students to add text-based details to support answers in their written responses through multiple resources, including Thinking maps. Teachers will implement the Teachers College workshop model and differentiate instruction as needed. Teachers will encourage students to generate their own questions that support their thinking as well as 2018-19 CEP 40 Small group During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) challenge their classmates’ ideas. Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports program. The School Implementation Team (SIT) will meet a minimum of 1x per month to assess the progress of students who are receiving at-risk services as well as determine additional students that need services.  Teacher/Parent  referral Students’ Independent Reading Levels  Classroom Assessments  NYS Exam scores  Team meetings to evaluate students’ progress in math and ELA  MOSL Baseline  data Students’ on demand writing assessments 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies  After school program that provides support and/or enrichment services   Backpacks  Winter coats, hats and gloves Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have seven students in Temporary Housing. We currently have seven students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 42  The services we are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds are: School supplies  After school program that provides support and/or enrichment services   Backpacks  Winter coats, hats and gloves 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received an allocation of 4847.00 for STH. 2018-19 CEP 43  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 26Q's has a rigorous, multi-level hiring practice that includes: *Level I- Screening and selection of candidate resumes and credentials *Level II- Administrative interview *Level III- Demonstration lesson observed by teacher team and administration *Level IV- Feedback and suggestions session with candidate *Level V- Candidate selection and review The hiring and retention process allows for complete transparency and inclusiveness. The hiring team and process reflects the rigor and commitment that is expected from all staff, administration, and teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning opportunities are provided to teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff to enable all students to meet Common Core Learning Standards. Two Teachers College Reading and Writing Project staff developers provide direct support to our k-2 and 3-5 teachers respectively. These include 20 sessions (10 K-2, 10 3-5) in which our teachers have opportunities to observe demonstration lessons, as well as unpack the literacy program. In conjunction with these building site professional developments, selected teachers attend 25 learning sessions at Columbia University. These sessions are turn-keyed and shared with all building staff. 2018-19 CEP 44  As a school, we utilize Monday extended times to drive initiatives, support our teachers, and build the capacity of all staff members regarding initiatives and content areas. These areas include social and emotional learning training, math discourse and understanding, supporting English Language Learners and students with special needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). It is essential we ensure a smooth transition for all early childhood programs into our elementary programs. A comprehensive orientation for all incoming families is provided. This orientation contains information regarding academic programs facilitated within our Prek classrooms, times of arrival and departure, instructional tracks being implemented, and services provided. Professional learning opportunities are provided to parents and staff to ensure all updates and sharing are comprehensive and inclusive of all stakeholders. The PLOs ensure school to home communication is fluid, transparent, and detailed. Parents have open communication with the teachers. They are permitted to walk the students directly to the classrooms and have open discussions about successes and concerns. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers have opportunities in the decision making process regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures during: *School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings 2018-19 CEP 45  *Measure of Student Learning (MoSL) Team meetings *Children First Always (CFA) meetings *Professional Development Committee Team *School Implementation Team (SIT) meetings Within these identified committee and team meetings, multiple assessment and professional development selections are discussed and solidified in collaboration with teachers and administration. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 46  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 26, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 26 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 49  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theEvery Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 26 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 50  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 51  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 52  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 54 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Upon analysis of data, including formative and summative assessments (NYSESLAT, ELA, MOSL, teacher feedback), we have determined a need to improve proficiency in all four modalities as we support academic language development in core content areas with a focus on ELA. Using the ELL Data Analysis tool, we will concentrate on ELL students who have not made adequate progress, as well as those who are new to the English language and our SIFE students, whose needs include the development of verbal competency. We will include enrichment activities for our Expanding and Commanding students who may still need support with comprehension and writing. We also plan to include a phonics component for our upper grade students (Wilson, Fundations) who are SIFE or newcomers at the Entering level. Our program will take place on Wednesday and Thursday following dismissal, from 2:45-4:00 PM with assigned supervision. Prior to the start of student attendance, we will include two planning sessions to select materials that must be ordered prior to the start of the program and set goals for the students enrolled. We will also include one planning session after the end of our program for self evaluation and review and allow time for planning for the following school year. Funding for these sessions will be at no cost to our Title III program. The start date for the program will be December 2018 with an end date of March 2019. We will invite our ELL students in grades 2 through 5 to participate. Various ENL methodologies will be incorporated to target support for a variety of subgroups . All instruction will be in English, with bilingual support where needed. We will continue to incorporate a variety of supplemental non-fiction materials as well as Finish Line for ELLs / Bilingual Common Core by Continental Press that are selected based on students' levels. Common branch teachers will work with TESOL certified teachers to plan and implement curriculum, in a co-teaching effort. Student attendance will be monitored through attendance sheets turned in monthly to the school secretary. Letters will be sent home in English and the preferred language of the parents inviting students to participate. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: We plan to offer two professional learning opportunities to our entire teaching staff. The sessions will take place during the Monday professional learning time for 80 minutes. Our first session will focus on unpacking CR Part 154 and the regulations and rationale behind ENL education, including the implementation of our LAP throughout the school. The 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development second session will focus on the sharing and enhancing best practices for our ELLs and FELLs, including scaffolding techniques, use of thinking maps focused on academic language development in the content areas . Workshops will be presented by our ENL team comprised of teachers with dual certification. Information obtained from monthly district ENL meeting may be turn-keyed at this time. Mrs. Herfield will attend all monthly ENL District 26 meetings, with members of the ENL rotating in attendance. All teachers with dual certification (TESOL and Common Branch/Early Childhood) will participate in ten monthly vertical sessions for thirty minutes led by administration from September 2018- June 2019. The techniques and strategies presented at the professional learning sessions will be utilized to support our ELL and FELL students in regard to their academic, social, and emotional needs. Attendance records of the professional development sessions will be used to indicate participation and collaboration within our ENL team. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We value the participation and input of our ELL/FELL families and plan to hold two workshops for parents based on topics indicated on our parent needs assessment. Parents indicated, through verbal conferencing and written requests, the need for such parent workshops that would allow the parents to experience their child's educational program firsthand. Topics may include: · · · Parent workshops facilitated by teachers that possess both Common Branch and ENL certification will take place in January 2019 and March 2019 on Tuesday mornings during our allotted Parent Engagement time from 7:45am-8:20am. Families will be informed of these workshops through notices, as well as through the use of our automated school messenger system. Our parent coordinator will schedule translation services as needed. Supporting student literacy at home NYSESLAT ELA&nbsp;and Mathematics State Exams/ Testing Accommodations&nbsp;&nbsp; Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. Per session $7,742.70 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3 Teachers x 24 sessions x 1 hour 15 mins x $60.65 = $5,458.50 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Principal and Assistant Principal will alternate supervising sessions X 24 sessions x 1 hour 30 mins x $63.45 = $2,284.20 Supplemental Resources such as boards, folders, instructional equipment provided for professional development facilitated by the Assistant Principal "Finish Line for ELLs" Grades 2-5 "Ready Books" Grade 2-5 NA NA Parental supplements- Flashdrive, workbooks, and resources to support school to home connection 2. Per diem Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $1,325.00 Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $2,400.00 0 0 $1,325.00 $12,792.70 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Rufus King Borough Queens School Number 026 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Andrew Pecorella Coach Lisa Asaro ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Michael DeBlasio Coach NA School Counselor Maria Petrakis Parent Nide Villanueva Parent Coordinator C. Marziliano Field Support Center Staff Member Rosalinda Valenza Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 695 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.79%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Classroom teachers on each grade use a variety of formative assessment to drive instruction for all students, including ELLs. Our implementation of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Program includes the keeping of running records on at least four occasions during the schools year. On demand writing pieces are used to guide instruction. Fountas and Pinnell are used to determine reading levels, both independent and guided. My Math chapter pre and post tests are used to assess gains, especially in the comprehension and completion of word problems. In lower grades (K and 1) teachers test phonemic awareness and sight word recognition on a regular basis. We also use results of NYSITELL for proper placement of new ELLs. Teachers review ELA and MATH State test scores and NYSESLAT results specifically for our ELLs. The data collected in regard to reading levels and math assessment results speaks to a need to service our ELL population with a specific focus on building and increasing their language across all subject areas. The multiple sources of data lends itself in creating groups that is inclusive of our ELL population in all areas within the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that support this effort include close communication between all staff members involved in the education of our students. EDAT is used for proper placement of ELLs and to monitor those students who are at risk or are long term ELLs . We examine test scores, time in the ENL program and daily attendance. We share results of all assessments in real time. We look at IEP goals and as well as SIFE classification. Monthly SIT meeting evaluate specific students deemed at risk to offer additional support services. The newly created ENL Team meets monthly to review data, discuss students, and shared collaborative ideas on best practices to support our ELL population. Scheduling is also a way to support the overall effort of supporting our ENL program. Our mass schedule strategically allows for two common preps a week for all grade level teachers to collaborate and create supports to improve our ELL students' progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments are used to evaluate the achievement of learning goals and determine next steps to reach a goal that was not met and to establish new ones. MOSL testing three time a year allows us to establish baseline levels and monitor gains in reading comprehension and writing skills. Unit exams inform teachers of progress in contents areas. Conferencing, portfolio assessments, self-monitorig rubrics are used to check progress as are special projects such as those completed for our science fair. Our Teachers College program includes summative assessments as each unit/genre is completed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At our monthly SIT meeting, specific students are discussed by all teachers involved and interventions are put in place. These interventions may include placing the students in our SETSS program as an an risk student or placement into our AIS Math or ELA program. All decisions are based upon data gathered from summative assessments and observation. For some of our ELLs, we may seek a bilingual evaluation to determine the needs of the student in the home language as well as in English. However, prior to our SIT meeting, teachers confer to see if a change in grouping within the classroom or other tweaks to instruction may boost accomplishment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All available data is used to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. Systematic analysis of data obtained from ELA and Math State testing, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, and the NYC Performance Assessment (new baseline) in conjunction with Fountas and Pinnell and a variety of school-wide periodic assessments drive instruction. Scores are broken down by components within the assessments by all modalities to determine individual weaknesses . We also look at the student's length of time in U.S. schools, educational background prior to arrival and the acculturation level of the student. We need to look at specific NYSLS that have not been mastered and address the skills that need intervention. Tier one intervention includes ESL instruction based upon the mandates of CR Part 154 as well as some native language support through peer translation or the use of dictionaries and glossaries. Teacher familiarity with any possible L1 interference (as well as the literacy level in L1, if known) and knowledge of the cultural background can assist at the Tier 1 level as well. Foundation skills such as alphabet recognition and phonemic awareness may be part of the Tier 1 plan. Content specific academic vocabulary should be introduced prior to a lesson. Classroom teachers must use all possible ESL methodology and strategies, including scaffolding and paraphrasing, to achieve skill development. Tier 2 intervention includes smaller group setting within the classroom focused on specific skill development. Oracy skills and vocabulary development must be enhanced. Progress is monitored consistently. Tier 3 intervention may include the student’s participation in small group AIS classes , Wilson Reading, Fundations, at risk SETTS (with a teacher specializes in learning disabilities) and Title III ESL programs. A bilingual evaluation may become necessary. All in all we must take a team approach to offer any intervention to allow the students to succeed, including support in the native language, and we must constantly monitor progress to add or remove additional supports as needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based upon analysis of data from Fall 2016 NYSITELL and Spring 2017 NYSESLAT results, approximately 60% of our students , 2018-19 CEP 61  both continuing and new, fall into the Transitional and Expanding range. About 40% fall into the Entering or Emerging category and most are very new to the U.S. All of our ELLs have been in the program for less than four years. Our continuing students improved test scores by at least one level, with many achieving commanding status. All students increased their speaking and listening skills and the focus for continuing students at the TR and EX level will be in the areas of reading comprehension and writing mechanics and depth. Our ELLs who show the least gains are in our self-contained and ICT classes and we must look closely for ways to help these students achieve English language proficiency. They receive targeted instruction in small group settings. The data informs us that we need to offer support in the development of academic vocabulary in all content areas. Our commanding students are now entitled to additional support by an ENL/CB certified pedagogue and focus will be on ELA skills and content comprehension. Our most recent EDAT analysis informs us that a majority of out at risk students are not ELLs. However, we use this data to drive instruction , form groups, differentiate and set individual goals. We continue to use NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data to place our students and insure that all requirements regarding time scheduled for standalone and integrated ENL instruction are met as per CR Part 154. Using multiple sources of assessments such as the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments, we can form a comprehensive plan around the needs and levels of our ELL population. This information drives the development and sustainability of our ENL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? It is important to share findings with all administrators and teachers involved in the education of our ELLs. Our SIT meetings are part of the sharing process. Extended time on Tuesdays allow for teacher team meetings and the opportunity to share and create adjustments on an individual basis. Monthly meetings of the entire ELL staff with administration presents the time to brainstorm and develop a plan for students, including those at-risk. Professional Development time on Mondays and Tuesdays may include the sharing of this information to all staff. It is essential that data is delivered continuously through these strategically created teams. Following team and ENL meetings, our ENL teachers turn-key grade specific strategies and updates to the staff. This collaboration promotes ownership and inclusiveness for our ELL population. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. All ELL students must receive a specified amount of standalone ENL and integrated ENL instruction, per CR Part 154.2. Stand-alone instruction (180 minutes per week) will develop English language skills to insure success in core content courses. It will be delivered by a certified ESL teacher through either a pull out or push in model, depending upon need and scheduling. Small groups in each grade will receive focused assistance with English language acquisition. Integrated instruction (180 minutes) is designed to build English skills through content language instruction. This will be delivered in the students’ classroom with the provider being dually certified (ESL and common branches). We have the option of delivery with our dually certified ESL teacher as well, who services those at the EN and EM level as well as the students in ICT or self-contained special education classrooms . Approximately 20 students cannot be placed into our self-contained ENL classrooms, as per their IEP. Students at the EN and EM levels may be pulled for instruction, while our TR and EX students will receive ENL instruction in their own classroom. Students will be instructed at grade level. However , there may be mixed proficiency levels within the classroom. All instruction is in English with home language support provided by peers, dictionaries and glossaries.and bilingual staff members. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 62  We do not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a DL program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We ensure that all ELLs receive the mandated instructional minutes per CR Part 154. Students at the EN and EM level will receive a total of 360 minutes (2 units) of instruction per week. Stand-alone instruction of 180 minutes per week will be provided by a certified ESL teacher. A dually certified classroom teacher (ESL and common branches) will provide 180 minutes of integrated instruction that incorporates core content including science, math, social studies and ELA, using researched and proven ENL methodology. Our TR and EX students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction either in their classroom with a dually certified teacher (K, 1 & 2) or in a pullout / push in model with a dual certified teacher. Out commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in either ELA or content area, provided by a certified dual licensed ESL teacher or dually certified classroom teacher. We use the most current NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores for placement. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction is driven by curriculum in all core content areas. Our goal is to provide the pathway for success to all students, including our ELLs and FELLs. We emphasize English language development with home language support, when available. Our stand-alone program allows our students to develop ELA skills needed to succeed in core content courses. Integrated ENL instruction includes both core content development, as well as English language development. Our Entering and Emerging students receive additional time (2 units) per week in which pedagogues employ a variety of scaffolds to improve English comprehension. There is native language support provided through the use of glossaries, dictionaries, computers/ ipads, peer and staff translation. Emphasis is on the development of speaking and listening skills combined with phonemic awareness and basic writing skills. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive instruction to further facilitate both ELA skills and core content learning. We strengthen writing skills while developing academic vocabulary. All instruction is differentiated based on the grade and proficiency level of our students. High expectations for all ensure that our ELL students develop grade appropriate skills and knowledge . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We implement all instruction in English. However, various bilingual staff are available to evaluate student work in the home language, particularly at the Entering and Emerging levels. Parents assist us as we learn about the educational background of our newer students. Peers in the classroom are called upon to evaluate and assess the work of other students who communicate in their language. Taken directly from the Home Language Surveys, we focus our efforts in supporting our students in both their identified home language and English. This can be found in providing translation services in regard to formal state assessments. It is useful to use these assessments as comparisons to the students' daily class work and assessments and identify the success they met with using the translation services compared to completing the assessments alone. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 63  Instruction is differentiated for each of our subgroups as follows: a. SIFE – after proper evaluation as a SIFE, a student will be placed in the appropriate grade level. They will be included in the Title III program and possibly be placed into an ITC class for additional attention. We place SIFE students into the last grade they completed in their own country. They are given a language peer assistant, when possible. We ensure they receive work that is leveled and tailored to support their current needs, while simultaneously challenging them to improve through rigorous instruction. Small pull-out groups with individualized instruction will assist the SIFE student in many ways. b. Newcomers – are immediately assessed and placed into the ENL program. They are buddied with a student who speaks their own language, if possible. They may also make use of a laptop for translation. ENL methodology for beginners is implemented, including TPR, color coding and modeling. They receive standalone instruction according to their NYSITELL level. c. Developing – ELLs continue in the appropriate ENL program. Focus is on fluency in speaking as well as reading comprehension skills and writing mechanics. Content area vocabulary is developed. Materials may be modified to ensure academic success. If NYSESLAT are low, these students continue to receive standalone instruction and we may employ tier 2 interventions in the classroom. d. Long term – we do not have long term ELLs at this time. However, we would monitor progress closely and implement all tiers of RTI. We may recommend a bilingual evaluation if progress is not apparent. e. FELLs – students who exit our ENL program by achieving the commanding level are mandated for additional support for up to two years. Students are entitled to up to 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction which is delivered in their own classroom with a dually certified teacher. This model focuses on the strategy to incorporate these students' ENL services into the classrooms within content areas. Small-group work, as well as whole class instruction is provided to these students. Their testing accommodations will continue to be implemented, providing them the support needed for optimum success. All ELLs and FELLs ( one to two years) receive testing accommodations that include time and a half, a separate location and use of bilingual glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Several of our ELLs are served by an IEP and are considered ELL-SWDs. These students were evaluated bilingually prior to this classification after all RTI tiers were implemented. Instruction in the classroom and the ENL program is driven by IEP recommendations. Students with disabilities need instruction that is responsive to their disability, level of English proficiency and ability in L1. A student is placed into the recommended program (self-contained, ICT) in the least restrictive environment. At times, we recommend SETSS or speech instruction alone or in conjunction with other programs. Students are taught by a qualified, certified special educator incorporating all strategies and methodology of a special education program in conjunction with ENL strategy. Goals on the IEP are set and adjusted regularly as they are met. Modification and adaptation of materials used to support curriculum and used school-wide may be necessary. The content and product should be identical to that of all students, though the process may vary. All ELL-SWDs receive the required amount of stand-alone or integrated ENL instruction, usually in a pull out setting. To ensure optimum learning is occurring, we use many academic strategies to facilitate instruction. Small group instruction is key to providing these students with instruction that is focused, specific, and goal-oriented. The students' IEPs drive the instruction and planning for these specific students. The use of technology such as Promethean boards allows our students to interactively receive their instruction with the goal of increasing their English proficiency. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our goal is to place ELLs with disabilities into the least restrictive environment, while promoting achievement of IEP goals. Materials may be modified in order to reach common core learning standards, as set by their IEP. We have utilized flexibility of scheduling for various core content classes. For example, a student in ICT may join a mainstream class for math. Our ELLs with disabilities join all ELL students for instruction at the appropriate level. Some have a bilingual paraprofessional assigned to assist with English proficiency and content comprehension. In coordination with our IEP Coordinator, we determine the exact amount of periods that will allow our students with both ELL and special education 2018-19 CEP 64  services to receive their mandated allowance of instruction in those areas. The breakdown of periods per week is compared and analyzed to the percentage of time needed in their special education setting. In order to ensure fluency, the special education teacher collaborates with the ENL teacher to plan the timing, period, and instructional content the student will be receiving. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer many targeting intervention programs in our school. Our beginner and intermediate ELLs receive additional time within the ESL structure to develop ELA skills and academic language. Our Title III program is available to all ELLs and struggling former ELLs. Classroom teachers work within the RTI framework and intervention is based upon the three tiers. Within the classroom teachers focus on language and academic needs based upon individual goals and include knowledge of the home language and culture and its influence on learning. Tier two intervention includes small and focused grouping concentrating on language deficits as well as specific content knowledge and mathematical skills. Tier three intervention is highly specific and may include at risk SETTS , speech, guidance and other related services. This intervention may be temporary or long term, depending upon results and accomplishments. The focus might be on language development, math skills or work and study habits depending upon individual need. Fundations and Wilson are offered to ELLs / SIFE students to enhance decoding and comprehension. Integrated ENL instruction will offer additional support in content areas. When a student is evaluated, we consider a bilingual para as additional support. Our 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to use Teacher's College reading and writing. We are introducing Passport social studies program, with an ELL component. Based on current NYSESLAT scoring, the population of ELL students is more prevalent. As a response, we ensure that English Language Arts is incorporated into each subject area with the benefit of increasing our ELL populations English proficiency. The Passport social studies program, TC Reading and Writing, and MY Math, will be driven by a goal to increase language proficiency in our ELL population. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not offer a bilingual program as our Parent Survey informs us that Freestanding ENL instruction in the choice of almost all of our parents. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all programs and activities in our school as they are part of the general classroom environment . They participate in all extra- curricular activities such as chorus, music and chess. They are active members of student council. ELLs may attend Virtual Y, an after school program in our building. Talented and Gifted testing is open to all ELLs. Our three tiered RTI includes ELL students and all supplemental services provided at each tier is inclusive of English Language Learners. The ENL integrated model allows the students to access an equal and rigorous education as their peers. We utilize Title III monies to create programs that are specifically tailored to meet the needs of our ELL population. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A wide variety of instructional materials are used to support our ELLs including all classroom age and grade level programs such as My Math and McGraw Hill Science. Our new Passport social studies program has an ELL component. Materials and libraries in the ESL room enhance and supplement grade level texts and books. Glossaries are used by ELL students and bilingual dictionaries are utilized to support comprehension of content. Picture books and high interest-low level readers are available for beginner ELLs. All materials may be adapted for use by ELLs through supplemental simplified texts, vocabulary pre-teaching, visuals and realia as well as other forms of proven ESL methodology. Students log onto to Starfall to develop literacy skills and letter-sound recognition. ABCya is used for our Spanish speakers. Waterford is available in the lower 2018-19 CEP 65  grades. Raz Kids is available to all our students for support at home and in school. Laptops are provided for translation needs to some students. Smart board technology is available in all of our classroom, enhancing the visual component of instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our free standing ESL model does allow for some native language support, though lessons are presented in English. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries assist comprehension and students are invited to bring personal mechanical translators. Members of our staff communicate in many languages including Spanish, Russian, Chinese and Urdu. We plan on purchasing bilingual library books and are currently asking parents for donations of old books in a variety of languages. Peer translators are available in most classrooms, especially for our newcomers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support and placement is based upon the ELLs age and grade completed prior to enrollment in NYC schools. Lessons in and out of the classroom are based upon grade appropriate curriculum planned around New York State learning standards. Newcomers may receive sheltered instruction . Articulation and collaboration between the classroom teacher, the ESL teacher and other providers insures that our students will receive instruction and support at age and grade level in direct correspondence to lessons in the mainstream classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students and their parents are given a tour of the building and introduced to key staff members. An interview is conducted at registration with parents and students by a certified ESL teacher. Welcoming workshops are held for parents. We are presently in the process of developing a handbook for new students and hope that it will be translated into several languages. Those who come mid-year are placed in a classroom where there is a speaker of the home language, if possible. Our multilingual staff members are available for additional support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? none 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All classroom teachers are required to obtain 15% of PD time addressing the needs of ELLs, as prescribed by CR Part 80. Teachers will be responsible for obtaining information regarding English language acquisition and best practices for ELL 2018-19 CEP 66  instruction, including the development of new strategies and the integration of content and language instruction. We plan on providing this through the availability of DOE webinars during mandated PD time. Teachers will be responsible for tracking their time using log sheets and maintaining agendas. All teachers are informed of workshops relating to ELL instruction via DELLS and the UFT. All ENL teachers must dedicate 50% of their P.D. to the instruction of ELLs. Teachers are able to view webinars and attend DELLS supported seminars, as well as District provided sessions. Monday PD time includes in-house sharing of ELL related information.. For example,teachers of ELLs who particiapte in PL sessions provided by the QNFSC will turn key to other teachers of ELLs during Monday PD time. Sessions in which ELL teachers will be in attendance include a focus on Academic Language instruction, text complexity, RTI for ELLs and oral language development as well as compliance issues. As a building wide-initiative and PS 26's inclusive model, all teachers are encouraged to attend ELL professional developments on a continuous basis. Selected and willing ENL teachers will provide professional development to the staff in regard to mandates, strategies, and student levels to increase the entire building's knowledge of ENL. Parent workshops will also be provided during parent engagement time to increase parent participation and communication. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PD requirements per CR Part 154 include 15% of total PD time (classroom teachers) and 50% (teachers of ELLs) dedicated to the instruction of ELLs. Sessions may be provided by DELL, QNBFSC and turn key training within our building. Teachers are responsible for maintaining logs regarding attendance and compliance and must be submitted on a timely basis. Both district and building professional developments will be offered to our staff, specifically our ENL teachers to ensure development and learning continues. Time is allotted on our extended days to provide the teachers and staff with such professional learning opportunities. With multiple opportunities from both the school building and district, requirements will be met. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We plan on providing individual meetings with parents of our ELLs in addition to our regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences. We will hold these meetings throughout the school year during parent engagement time (Tuesday afternoons). We will discuss the goals of our programs and language development progress for each and every ELL student. Classroom teachers are involved as well as the ENL teacher. When requested, we will include provisions for interpretation/translation needs by using our staff on hand (Korean, Chinese, Urdu, Russian, Spanish). We send letters home reminding parents of their right to this additional time, however many are not available and may not attend regular parent-teacher conferences. We continue to invite these parents and hope attendance will increase. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The needs of our parents are evaluated through the efforts of our parent coordinator together with our teachers. We survey all parents on the preferred language of communication at the start of each school year, ELL and non-ELL parents alike. We also survey parents regarding their individual needs such as workshop requests. At their request, we have presented 2018-19 CEP 67  workshops about the steps towards citizenship as well as searching for health insurance for families. We recently added a workshop program for our parents on Tuesday afternoons , several which focus if the needs of our ELLs and FELLs. A multilingual social worker, who is able to communicate with our Korean and Chinese parents, has recently joined our staff and is encouraging more parent involvement by holding bilingual workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We are very proud of our Adult ESL program. Many of the parents of our ELLs are encouraged to enroll. We receive a tremendous response. Parents who participate set a great example for their children and we see a direct relationship between the growth of parents in their new language and that of their children. For the first time, we will have a dually certified (TESOL/CB) pedagogue in each grade. Therefore integrated instruction for a majority of our ELLs will occur in the classroom. This offered the opportunity for small group concentrated and focused instruction for those ELLS who are in need of the additional standalone time in order to make significant gains in English language proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Andrew Pecorella, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Rufus King School DBN: 26Q026 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) A. Pecorella M. DeBlasio Title Principal Assistant Principal C. Marziliano Parent Coordinator V.Klinger ENL/Bilingual Teacher N. Villanueva Parent NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/17/17 06/17/17 06/17/17 06/17/17 06/17/17 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q026 School Name: Rufus King Superintendent: D. Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Christine Marziliano Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess the language preferences of our parents, both oral and written, based upon information we gather in ATS - RCPL report (entire school) and from the HLIS form filled out in the home language at registration. We also use the blue Emergency Contact cards as well as surveys by both the Parent Coordinator and the classroom teachers. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 556 74.73 548 73.66 2018-19 CEP 71 75 62 0 20 12 6 6 2 1` 1 1 0 0 Korean Chinese - any Mandarin Spanish Urdu Russian Arabic Punjabi Pashto Portuguese Hindi Bengali Polish 10.08 8.33 0 2.69 1.6 .81 .81 .27 .13 .13 .13 0 0 76 41 18 25 13 6 6 2 1 1 0 1 1 10.22 5.51 2.42 3.36 1.75 .81 .81 .27 .13 .13 0 .13 .13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. various DOE website for some languages Documents we disseminate that require translation include the Citywide Behavioral Expectations pamphlet, Special Education Services guide, the Achieve NYC guide, lunch forms and Chancellors Regulations 2018-19 CEP 72  A660. Parents are made aware of all documents translated on the DOE website, including calendars and menus. HLIS ELL Parent Program Selection Survey Program Placement ELLS In house staff for some of the low incidence languages DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Printed from DOE website Printed from DOE website Printed from DOE website 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings We hold four parent teacher conferences and one Annual ELL parent meeting per year, dates as specified by the DOE. We also hold monthly PTA meetings. Calls to parents are prompted by a variety of reasons including attendance or missing homework. Per DOE calendar ELL Parent Orientation From September and ongoing How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? DOE Website Private providers sanctioned by DOE Telephone translattion unit In house staff In house staff DOE provided video 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In house translation or communication through our school messenger automated dialing system, with translation capabilities. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members are required to be familiar with those in our building who may provide translation to both students and parents during the school day. They are informed of parents' rights to translation of both written and spoken information. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Per Chancellors Regulation A-663 we post a welcome poster in many places (entrance, office) and supply the Parents Bill of RIghts in multiple languages. The Security Desk and the main office keep available a Language ID guide for parents. All materials that will assist in this process are obtained from the Language Access kits. All parents of ELLs are informed of their rights during the initial parent orientation meeting led by our ENL personnel. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We gather feedback from parents on the availability and quality of translation services. Parents respond positively when surveyed. Our problem is usually with low incidence languages, when materials are not translated on the DOE website and we do not have in-house staff. 2018-19 CEP 74 
