2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q034 School Name: P.S. 034 JOHN HARVARD Principal: PAULINE SHAKESPEARE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information John Harvard 342900010034 School Number (DBN): 29/Q/034 Pre-Kindergarten through fifth grade 104-12 Springfield Boulevard, Queens Village NY 11429 718-465-6818 Phone Number: 718-464-9073 Fax: Pauline Shakespeare pshakes@schools.ny.gov School Contact Person: Pauline Shakespeare Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kevin Gaillard Lois Shivers Marisa Lambert SharmicaDavis N/A N/A Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Ms. Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191 Street Rm 122 Hollis New York 11423 BMitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 Phone Number: 718-264-3148 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-522-7133 Phone Number: Fax: 718-264-3148 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Pauline Shakespeare Kevin Gaillard Lois Shivers N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NubiaGuerrero SharmicaDavis SabaSaid Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Carmita Lliguicota AntonellaLowrey Vera Tomaselli Marisa Lambert Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent UFT UFT Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is ensuring that all our children achieve mastery of all the essential learning standards. Literacy is our obsession. We focus on effective, interactive, collaborative comprehensive instruction incorporated in all content areas to provide competency and mastery. In a multicultural environment fortified by family involvement we raise expectations and develop a firm understanding of social and civic values of acceptance and respect. Our focus will remain that all students can learn. Our children will meet and exceed the established performance standards in language arts, mathematics, science and social studies. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our vision is to create an unforgettable experience for all our students in Pre-K through Grade 5. Our goal is to provide a safe, warm environment in which our students develop the joy of learning. Our teaching practices are grounded in research to ensure all of our students experience growth as they prepare for college. Our school is also a place of learning for our students' families. Opportunities are consistently made available to include all our families in the culture of our school. Rigorous instruction, high expectations, a warm and friendly environment for the entire family are the hallmarks of the P.S. 34 experience. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 34, John Harvard, is a PreK-5 school located in Queens Village, New York. Our school currently has 601 students with approximately 9.98% English Language Learners and 14.98% of students with IEP’s. In order to meet the needs of our diverse students and rigorous curriculum, we continue to incorporate the workshop model in all subject areas. The workshop model is whole class instruction followed by differentiated small group instruction based on data. This year our focus will be on anecdotal records of small group instruction in math and guided reading to improve student outcomes. We also provide a morning program, after-school program and a Saturday School program for students in grades 3-5 for small group instruction in ELA and math. We continue to incorporate technology into our classrooms. Laptops and interactive programs were purchased such as I-ready for math and ELA and Imagine Learning for our ELL students. Special Initiatives: During the 2017-2018 school year, students in grades 2-5 participated in a STEM program called Culture Play. Students experienced a collaborative, team oriented experience in robotics and coding. Our school also participated in many fundraisers to help raise money for certain charities. We participated in a 3 week program for Pennies for Patients where students collected coins and raised funds to help thousands of people in their fight against blood cancers. We also raised money for the American Heart Association and had a Diabetes walk to raise awareness and money. We also participated in City Harvest. Students donated non-perishable items to help provide much needed food for families. In the arts , students in grades 1-5 participated in an African Dance Residency Program. Dance instructors and drummers came to the school to teach our students about the African culture and each class performed a dance during a dance recital. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  One of our challenges is ensuring our ELL students and special education students, which is 24.98% of our student population, making gains in ELA and math instruction that are evident by their success in NYSSELAT testing, the New York State ELA and Math test, the science state test and the NYC Performance tasks in ELA and/or math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Using the Framework for Great Schools our school made measurable progress in supportive environment. Our school established a culture in which students felt safe and supported by their teachers and their peers. This was an area of celebration in our PPO. Our school continues to work diligently to build a culture of trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students. We used a variety of programs to help support our goal such as Bucket Filling, Sanford Harmony, Guys with Ties, Leading Ladies, and Kind Student of the Week. According to our end of the year data in Advance, our measure of teacher practice, Domain 2: Classroom environment was our highest rated domain for effective and highly effective teachers. Our goal for this year is rigorous instruction. Teachers will write and analyze anecdotal records during math and ELA instruction in order to assess classroom performance and drive instruction for academic achievement. Teacher's are educational scientist who consistently collect and analyze data. Anecdotes tell a students' learning journey and is essential to understand how to help the student reach his/her destination. Using the anecdotes teacher's will customize instruction to meet the needs of students which is aligned to Common Core. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q034 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 580 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 73 73 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.8% 16.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.55 0% 38% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 71% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 92.6% 8.3% 16.4% 70.0% 9.3% 2.8% 4 0% 12 42.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A goal for District 29 for the 2018-2019 is to improve math instruction. According to our PPO, all classrooms are not consistently offering sufficiently differentiated supports to provide multiple entry points so all learners have access to content in math instruction. Strength: In 2017-2018 we began to implement the 8 mathematical practices in grades K-5 to provide consistency in our math instruction. Area of Need: Teachers writing anecdotal records during math instruction in order to provide additional remediation for academic achievement and to improve student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will write anecdotal records during math instruction to have a deeper understanding of students strengths and areas of improvement in order to improve student outcome on formal and informal assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development for teachers on how to write anecdotal records and then use those anecdotes to create next steps to improve student performance. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Fall 2018 Administration Teachers Continue to implement the 8 mathematical practices in K-5 classrooms so students will be able to use math vocabulary to support or oppose the work of others. K-5 Students September 2018-June 2019 Using data from NYCPT, math state test, I-ready, informal and formal assessments as well as anecdotal records from math instruction to design lessons to meet the students needs to improve math understanding. Conduct case studies on a four week cycle to see a child's math journey. Using the anecdotal records from math lessons as well as formal and informal data, administration will discuss the child's strengths, areas of concern and next steps to improve student outcomes. Students students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers November 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administration Collaborate math strategies and anecdotal records with ENL teachers and SETSS teacher to ensure our ENL students and SWD students needs are being met in math. Staff September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshop in changes in math common core standards (Spring, Administration) I-ready at home Technology Program (Fall, Winter, Spring, Technology Teacher) Workshops of why teacher's take notes during instruction (Administration, Teachers, Fall) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 14  Books: Making Math Visible Teacher team meetings Classroom Inter-visits Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will show growth in math based on teacher anecdotal records, informal and formal math assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYCPT in math: growth from BOY to EOY grades K-5 (Fall and Spring) I-ready diagnosis assessments (BOY, MOY and EOY) Go Math mid-chapter and end of chapter assessments (end of units) Exit slips (Daily) Anecdotes from math lessons (Daily) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Over the past 2 years our school implemented a school-wide social emotional kindness program. Students and staff participated in a school wide "Bucket filler" campaign. Students in PreK-grade 5 fill buckets when they do and say things that are kind, considerate, caring and respectful. The program is dedicated to building a positive environment that promotes kindness, respect, and empathy. Our goal is to teach students to love themselves while building positive relationships. Strength: Our kindness program initiative was an area of celebration in our PPO and Quality Review. Also, Domain 2: Classroom Environment, was our highest percentage of teachers rated highly effective and effective this school year 2017-2018. 89.09% of teachers were rated highly effective and effective which exceeded our goal from last year of 85%. We also had a decrease in our OORS report. Area of Need: According to our NYC School Quality Guide Survey report, 56% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations which is far below the District average of 75% and the City average of 79%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the Quality Guide survey based on teachers having access to a Crisis team in order to provide support and to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations of students. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a crisis team in which each member of the team understands its role and responsibility. Staff Fall 2018 Administration Staff Develop a de-escalation plan for the school community with guidelines for the school community to follow during a crisis. School Community Fall 2018 Administration Continue to implement our school-wide strategies to support a positive school environment such as the Bucket Filling Program, Character Trait of the month, and Kind Student of the Week. Build partnerships with community based organizations such as the Floating Hospital, in order to provide workshops for students and parents. Students Staff Students Parents SEPTEMBER 2018-JUNE 2019 SEPTEMBER 2018-JUNE 2019 Staff Administration Staff Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Continue implementing Bucket Filler Program with families during workshops, Tuesday parent engagement and parent conferences (Yearly, staff) Workshops on social and emotional needs of children (Fall, Winter, Spring Guidance counselor) Strategies for at home to implement for social emotional learning (Winter, Guidance counselor) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony Program Bucket Filling Program Floating Hospital to provide workshops for parents and students 2018-19 CEP 17  School Mental Health Consultant: Myriam-Gehy to provide support to staff and families Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a decrease in our OORS reports using the discipline code and Domain 2: Classroom Environment will continue to be our highest domain using the Danielson Framework during formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams have been a focus for our school for the past 2 years with the goal of increasing student achievement. We continue to improve with the consistency of our teams meeting on a regular basis and discussing student work to improve student outcomes and teacher instruction. Strengths: Our PPO and Quality Review feedback highlighted the consistency of teacher teams throughout our school. Area of Need: According to the NYC School Quality Guide Survey, 72% of teachers say that their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels which is far below the District average of 83% and the City average of 86%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the coordination of teacher teams will improve instruction and student outcomes through peer collaboration which will cause a 5% increase on the NYC School Guide Survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create vertical teacher teams across multiple grades so teachers can collaborate during teacher team meetings to improve instruction and academic achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Winter 2019 Administration Schedule 6 week cycles for teachers to inter-visit on grade level classrooms as well as multiple grades to discuss with each other the strength's in each others practice and to improve student outcomes. Teachers Teachers providing constructive and meaningful feedback during inter-visits to improve instruction and student outcomes Teachers Teachers Administration Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Analyzing data and end of the year expectations from grade to grade to scaffold instruction Teachers June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops hosted by staff in a variety of subject areas (Monthly) Weekly newsletters to parents to inform parents of what is happening in the classroom and school (Teachers, weekly) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Peer intervisits Professional Development Common Planning Vertical teams 2018-19 CEP 20  Book: Collaborative Learning through Peer Inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher collaboration will increase based on the inter-visits and meaningful feedback provided by colleagues to improve instruction which will lead to an improvement in student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Guide Survey Feedback from teachers during inter-visits Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall our MOTP Progress Report for the 2017-2018 school year was as follows: 61.32% of teachers were rated Highly Effective, 22.17% of teachers were rated Effective and 13.68% of teachers were rated Developing. According to our Measure of Teacher Practice data from 2017-2018 in Advance, Domain 3 component c, Questioning and Discussion, was the component in which our teachers need improvement. Strength: 55.17% of our teachers were rated Highly effective and 23.28% of our teachers were rated Effective. Area of Need: 19.83% of our teachers were rated developing and 1.72% of our teachers were rated ineffective in this component making this the highest component of developing/ineffective teachers when analyzing our data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will improve one performance level reflected in 3c, questioning and discussions, in Advance by administration conducting formal and informal observations using the Danielson Framework for instruction. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development on quality of questions using Webbs Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and/or Blooms Taxonomy to deepen student understanding required by a task. Teachers Students Continue to incorporate oral language strategies to promote discussion techniques such as turn and talk, think, pair and share and tiered questioning so all students have an opportunity to participate in a lesson. Students Conduct 6 week cycles of observations by administration both formally and informally giving timely feedback to teachers to monitor growth in discussion and questioning. Teachers Teachers keeping anecdotal records during instruction to ensure all students answer questions and participate in class discussions throughout a lesson. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshop on oral language and ways to promote language at home (Fall, Administration) Weekly Newsletters from teachers that incorporates oral language activities to do at home (Weekly, Teachers) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling intervisits for teacher’s to observe lessons Mondo Oral language instruction in K-5 classroom Mondo Oral language Assessment 2018-19 CEP 23  Common planning sessions across grades as well as with vertical grades to include language standards Professional Development: Weteach NYC Book: Literacy for our Youngest Learners Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of our teachers will be rated effective or highly effective in Domain 3 category C by using the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3C in Danielson Framework and Mondo oral language assessment (beginning of the year and end of the year assessment) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Each year from 2014 through 2017 there has been a 1-2% increase in parents completing the NYC School Survey. This school year, 2017-2018, there was a decrease in parents completing the survey but an increase in teachers completing the survey. Survey completed by parents in 2017-2018: 27% Survey completed by teachers in 2017-2018: 51% Strength: Teacher surveys increased from 24% completed in 2016-2017 to 51% completed in 2017-2018 Area of need: Parents participating in school activities and events in order to increase the number of parents completing the NYC School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parents completing the NYC school survey by parents participating in school events hosted by administration, staff members and the PTA. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Build a team to help devise strategies, plan events, spread the word and reach out to families. During Tuesday afternoon, parent engagement time, make school computers available to complete the survey. Families Spring 2019 School Personnel Staff Spring 2019 Parent Coordinator Encourage parents to volunteer at school events and attend weekly parent workshops as well as monthly PTA meetings. Communicate to parents about completing the survey by sending a letter, giving the website on school newsletter, and sending daily school messenger calls. Families Families September 2018-June 2019 Staff Administration Staff Spring 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Families Staff Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Weekly parent workshops described in our monthly calendar Hosting parent events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent survey Incentives PTA meeting and school-wide events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in parent workshop attendance and volunteers helping in school-wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from 2018-2019 survey compared to 2017-2018 as well as parent sign-in sheets from parent workshops, Parent-teacher conferences, and PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading Small group instruction Guided math instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction During school Before and after school Saturday Program During school Before and after school Saturday Program During school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State exam scores for students in grades 4 and 5. Running records of students not meeting interim benchmarks every six weeks. Writing assessments State exam scores students in grades 4 and 5. Math benchmarks. Intervention will be provided by classroom teacher using subject appropriate text based on ELA assessments. Intervention will be based provided based by classroom teacher using subject appropriate text based on ELA assessments. Students requiring at-risk services will be reviewed at our Small group instruction Small group instruction During school Small group instruction Small group During school 2018-19 CEP 28  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) monthly PPT meeting based on requests made by teachers, administration and/or families. One on one One on One 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have approximately 75 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Transportation is provided for the students as well as metro cards Clothing: school uniforms as well as gym uniforms Backpacks with supplies Counseling Services Small group instruction during the day to help students progress academically After-school intervention as well as Saturday school intervention are offered to students in grades 3,4, and 5 Doctor visits in school Glasses vouchers Dental Bus Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are required to be leaders in educational theory and practice. All work will reflect the highest level of performance standards. New teachers will be drawn to a cohesive innovative and high quality education model. New teachers are provided with a school-based mentor, given the opportunity to observe highly effective teachers. Highly effective teachers will model lessons for teachers Teachers are interviewed by an interview committee and a group decision is made. Teachers will provide professional development for colleagues based on the needs of the students. Teachers will be trained as mentors to provide support for new teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Danielson Framework and common core curriculum tasks are integrated via school based professional development as a yearlong unfolding model to advance instruction and increase student achievement. Staff members are also offered district wide/city wide professional development throughout the school year in order to deepen their knowledge base, enhance instructional practice and increase student achievement. Peer Inter-visitations offered from teachers who are rated highly effective based on the Danielson Framework. Create vertical teams across multiple grades so teachers can collaborate Using anecdotes during lessons to inform instruction to improve student performance Teachers and staff providing practical and meaningful feedback comments to support student work products. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Monthly open houses from September through June so parents/guardians can visit kindergarten classrooms Pre-Kindergarten students take a tour of our kindergarten classrooms in June Pre-Kindergarten students from community centers visit our kindergarten classrooms Workshops offered to parents about transitioning to kindergarten Stepping Up ceremony in June School brochure Align curriculum to common core standards Pre-Kindergarten students are involved in our school activities as well as evening activities such as pajama night Kindergarten orientation is scheduled in Spring for pre-kindergarten parents to attend 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams will develop formative and summative assessments using various questioning techniques. Then using student data teachers will plan instruction based on student’s needs as shown from item analysis assessments. 2018-19 CEP 33 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 289,172 7,725 12,366 TBD TBD x x x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5E 5E 5E 5E 5A, B, C, D, E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local A MOSL committee will choose the instrument used in order to evaluate students measure of learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 34   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 34 John Harvard, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 34Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 34Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 38  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 35 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III supplemental program is designed to maximize English proficiency and student achievement in mathematics and literacy. This program will take place after school and Saturday Academy and will target 35 students from grades 3-5. The program will be taught in English, with appropriate materials to encourage language development in English. ELLs/MLLs are held to the same high expectations outlined in the CCLS. The goal of this program is to support and develop literacy and math skills in order to prepare ELLs for the high expectations of the standards and become college and career ready. The program will take place two(2) afternoons a week (Wednesday and Thursday), 1 hour 45 minutes a day (2:45 - 4:30) from November 2017 through April 2018 (14 weeks). Our certified ENL teacher and a licensed Common Branch teacher will provide the instruction. ENL teacher will work with the Common Branch teacher using ENL strategies to support the content being taught by the CB teacher. The ELL teacher will focus on academic language and using linguistic frames to support speaking and writing development. This group will have 20 students and will consist of Newcomers, Entering, and Emerging ELLs. Having two (2) teachers in the class will support the language development of these students. Three teachers who hold both content area/common branch and Tesol certification will work with fifteen (15) Expanding ELLs as well as Commanding / Former ELLs who have tested Proficient on the NYSESLAT within the past two years. After reviewing the 2015 NYSESLAT scores and AMAO indicator tool, the ENL teacher and the ELL Team determined that the modalities of weaknesses were in reading and writing. It was also determined that many of the 4th and 5th grade ELLs are in-danger of becoming Long Term ELLS (LTE). Therefore the students will be divided into 2 groups based on their current NYSESLAT level and Years of Service. The focus of this program will be differentiated based on the diverse needs of learners within our ELL population. Assessments will be done on an ongoing basis and drive the instruction. The Focus Collection is a set of interdisciplinary non fiction texts the teachers will use to strengthen English Language Learners' comprehensions skills. Crosswalk Coach will emphasize grammar and writing skills, such as using text evidence to support responses. BuckleDown will concentrate on reinforcing math concepts and skills. With additional funding, we will extend the Saturday School and After-School program, and design an early morning program for 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: All teachers of ELL, including the ENL teacher, receive training on an ongoing basis, on- site and off-site, during the school day, and after the school day. AIS teacher who works with ELLs receive training on a consistent basis as well. The professional development is scheduled for 80 minutes once a month during Monday PD time (from 2:50 pm to 4:10 pm). The Professional Learning will be conducted by Assistant Principals, Vera Tomaselli and Marisa Lambert. The goal of the sessions will be to learn and reflect on "best practices" that meet the needs of ELLs. Topics to be covered will include but not limited to: *Using data to plan instruction for ELLs - October 2017 - Marisa Lambert *Scaffolding strategies for ELLs - November 2017 - Vera Tomaselli *Questioning Strategies for ELLs - January 2018 - Marisa Lambert *Building Academic Language for ELLs - March 2018 - Vera Tomaselli * Using writing frames to support ELLs in the writing process - April 2018 - Vera Tomaselli The ENL teacher will also have the opportunity to share additional strategies and resources that she learns about at the monthly Network ELL Liaison Meetings given by the Queens Borough Field Support Center. Every Tuesday after dismissal, teachers of ELLs, including ENL teacher, meet in teams to engage in other professional learning opportunities, i.e. analyzing student work, planning standards-based lessons, reviewing data, and conducting inquiry. There are also two other times during the week that all CB teachers including the ENL teacher meet in teams during the school day (common prep periods). Furthermore the teachers will have the opportunity to attend Professional Learning opportunities offered by the Division of English Language Learners. Records will be maintained in our school Professional Development Binder which will include the agenda and attendance sheet. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement is encouraged in our school community. Parents are involved in ongoing initiatives including regularly scheduled PTA meetings, monthly "coffee with the Principal" , "pizza with the Principal" days, and workshops for families in literacy, math and science. We also offer recreational activities for families. Family participation is strongly encouraged in special events such as Spirit Day, Dance Festival( with a different theme each year), Field Day(with numerous games and sports), Winter and Spring Recorder Concerts, Class Assemblies and African Dance Assembly. Programs 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities centered around local music, dance and the arts help each and every child and their families feel a part of their individual heritage and also a part of the school and wider community. Also, parents are encouraged to join our Memorial Day celebrations and career day. Our Memorial Day celebration highlights our local veterans, and our career day exposes students to many successful and innovative people in our community. All these events and workshops are available on our school's monthly calendar. Each week a minimum of 2 workshops are available for parents to attend per week. A copy of the monthly calendar is sent home at the beginning of each month so that they can make the necessary arrangements to attend. Also notices announcing these events will be sent home as reminders. The notices will be translated into multiple languages. All agendas and attendance sheets are kept in our school Parent Engagement Binder. Workshops are held from September to June during the day and evening to accommodate the needs of all parents. They may last one-to-two hours. The following staff will provide workshops: Principal - Pauline Shakespeare, Assistant Principals - Vera Tomaselli, and Marisa Lambert, Parent Coordinator - Jenny De Stephano, ENL teacher, Ms. Aktas , Guidance Counsellor - Jill Handley, Technology teacher- Kevin Guillard, Gym teachers - Kelly Malone and James Sullivan, as well as the school nurse, Mary Fitzpatrick and our art teacher, Ms. Cowan.. The topics will include, but not be limited to: *Helping Your Child with Phonics/Phonemic Awareness (Foundations) - Vera Tomaselli - November 2017 *Family Fitness - November 2017 - Kelly Malone/J.Sullivan - November 2017 * Vocabulary and Language Development - Marisa Lambert - December 2017 *Technology Sessions - Kevin Guillard - December 2017, February 2018, March 2018 * Math Literacy for Early Childhood learners - Pauline Shakespeare - January 2018 *Math Literacy for Upper Elementary - January 2018 - Pauline Shakespeare * Eating Healthy, Staying Healthy - Mary Fitzpatrick/Jenny DeStephano - February 2018 *Homework Discussion and Resources for Help - Marisa Lambert - February 2018 * Read-Aloud Activities - Vera Tomaselli - March 2018 *How to Practice Sight Words at Home - Vera Tomaselli - March 2018 *How Can I Improve My Child's Reading and Writing Skills During Summer? -Early Childhood Learners - April 2018- V. Tomaselli -Upper Elementary Students - April 2018 - M. Lambert Our ENL teacher works with the Translation and Interpretation unit to ensure that parents are informed appropriately. Parents of ELLs receive invitations in their home language and phone calls home via the school messaging system. All communication will be in multiple languages as necessary. Workshop flyers are posted outside of the school as well as in the school's main lobby. Additionally, workshops are included on the monthly calendar which is distributed to all parents. Workshops are held between 9:15 a.m. to 10:30 a.m., and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.Simultaneous Translation will be provided during all workshops. The ENL teacher ensures that parents of ELLs receive translation support at workshops. In our building, we have staff members who speak Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French. We also have parent volunteers who assist as translators. We also utilize DOE telephone interpretation hotline. In addition to monthly workshops, the parents of the participating ELL students will also be invited to attend four (4) meetings during the course of the Title III program. During these meetings, parents will be given updates on their child's progress. The three (3) teachers will conduct these meetings. The first meeting will be held in November 2017. Expectations, requirements and materials will be discussed. The following meetings will be in January 2018, February 2018, and March 2018. The topics for these meeting will be engaging, educational, and informative. Parents will learn about the process of learning a second language and receive materials to support their child at home ( H. Aktas/ V. Tomaselli). The parents will also learn about state assessments, including NYSESLAT, and their importance in the education of their 2018-19 CEP 46 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities child ( H. Aktas/ M. Lambert). Sample exams will be given to the parents. Translators will be available in Haitian Creole and Spanish. With the additional funding we will have May and June workshops for parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 11200 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name John Harvard Borough Queens School Number 34 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pauline Shakespeare Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Hamide Aktas Teacher/Subject Area Samantha Maloney - CB Teacher/Subject Area Colleen Moran - CB Related-Service Provider Kristin Gelman - SETTS Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Marisa Lambert, Vera Tomaselli Coach type here School Counselor Jill Handley - G. Counselor Parent Taeshyka Price Parent Coordinator Jennie DeStefano Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 585 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.82%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessments can provide important information to help guide and inform instruction. Informal assessment consists of the evidence teachers collect in class on a continuous basis to measure the progress of their students in mastering the skills and content taught. It provides continuous feedback to students, teachers, and parents. Each student is compared only to his/her own prior level of achievement. There are many assessments used in our school. Classroom assessments that are used in all grade K -5 classes are the Mondo assessments. These assessments test oral language, decoding skills, memory skills, auditory discrimination and reading comprehension levels. Mondo oral language assessments are administered to track student growth. NYSITELL is the test we use to determine initial entitlement. Students receive instruction in English with native language support in freestanding ESL/ENL programs throughout the school year. In spring students take NYSESLAT, a test that measures the English proficiency of ELLs and determines their progress as well as their continued entitlement or exit from entitlement. Since students receive ESL/ENL services as well as other intervention services they are expected to show progress 2018-19 CEP 49  academically. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All students at P.S. 34 are given formal assessments throughout the year in reading and writing. Running records are administered three times a year formally, and on a monthly basis informally.This assesses their reading level (including comprehension, fluency, and accuracy). additionally, students are assessed informally in speaking during the running records. During each lesson there is an accountable talk portion which is an opportunity for teachers to listen in as students discuss with one another, thus assessing their listening and speaking skills. For each unit of study we have created standards progression, ensuring that for each unit common core standards are taught and assessed in each of the four modalities. Every Tuesday after dismissal, teachers of ELLs, including ENL teacher, meet in teams to engage in other professional learning opportunities, i.e. analyzing student work, planning standards-based lessons, reviewing data, and conducting inquiry. There are also two other times during the week that all teachers, including ENL teacher, meet in teams during the school day (common prep periods). Additionally, the ENL teacher joins the team meeting to discuss further planning. Emails, Googledoc, teachers planning page are used for lesson planning. Student scores and performance levels are gathered and made available to all staff. Various assessments are administered by classroom teachers and assessment teams throughout the year. Deadlines are included on the calendar to make certain this data is immediately made available to all staff in order to be used for planning and designing instruction based on students needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our program for ELLs we we will closely monitor progress for all students. Formal assessments are New York State ELA and Math Tests, NYS Interim Assessments, ELL Interim Assessments, and NYSESLAT. Informal assessments portfolios, teacher-made tests, teachers' observations. For oral communication and reading we use performance-based assessments. Our ELLs complete the appropriate grade level New York City Performance Task in ELA and math and a teacher created baseline assessment to provide data for student reading and comprehension levels. We use the NYSITELL for new students and NYSESLAT scores to further evaluate and determine student needs. These assessments are designed to inform educators with specific data about their students strengths and needs are in English language development. The NYC interim assessments are used by the school leadership team to arrange AIS groups to focus teacher instruction. The students' weaknesses are targeted by these tests and students are pulled out for small group instruction. The ELL interim assessments are used during small group instruction to focus on the student's individual needs and assess areas of difficulty prior to the administration of the NYSESLAT. After receiving and analyzing NYSESLAT results, we evaluate the programs, units, and teaching in order to alter for the following school year. In past years, the reading and writing modalities have proven to be the biggest challenges for our ELLs. Instruction in reading and writing is therefore emphasized. Instruction is scaffolded through home language support, realia, and visual representations. The Principal's Monthly Book Challenge allows ELLs to compete with their peers which makes reading fun and easy. This year while continuing to work with the students to improve their NYSESLAT scores in each modality, and their independent reading levels, we will focus on the Common Core State Standards and State exam scores to support growth on the exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered educators work cooperatively to develop a plan to increase students language proficiency. These professionals work congruently to design individualized action plans for students in the integrated/classroom setting as well as in the freestanding ENL setting. By working cooperatively, our teachers design a plan to address interventions based on the summative data to effectively increase student achievement. The "workshop model" of writing will be utilized. Rubrics will be based on the literacy standards. Since this is a balanced literacy approach, assessment will be done individually through conferencing. 'Let's Talk About It' program from Mondo and 'Let's Talk' program from Reach (National Geographic) will be used to develop oral language skills during the literacy block in 2018-19 CEP 50  grades kindergarten through fifth grade with the classroom teacher as well as ENL teacher. Classroom teachers incorporate daily shared reading lessons in grades kindergarten through grade 2 in which choral reading in reading different genres. Teachers analyze conversation and responses of students during "turn and talk", "think-pair-share", and "inside circle out". The ENL program has been aligned with the new comprehensive core curriculum in both literacy and math. Our Assistant Principals and classroom teachers as well as Resource Room Specialist will work in conjunction with our ENL teacher enhancing instruction. Double periods of ENL instruction will be given to many of our students. Our school based support team, guidance counselor and resource room specialist will work with individuals as well as small groups based upon the students' need. All ELLs will receive small group,targeted instruction for ELA, Math and ENL. Those students who have low NYSESLAT scores will receive differentiated instruction in reading, writing, and math, also AIS services in reading, writing, listening and speaking. In addition of these services , P.S. 34 is offering an after school program( from January 2018 to April 2018) as well as Saturday Academy ( from December 2017 to April 2018) to improve performance of ENL, Math and ELA. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the start of the school year we review State Data, benchmark assessments, and on-demand writing assessments. Based upon all of the data reviewed, we determined the specific tier 1 activities within the classroom appropriate for each student. In addition we invite any student in need to our after-school programs ( tier 2 intervention). We determine whether the student need ESL services, ELA, or Math ( or a combination). Students are reassessed throughout the year to determine continuation of tier1/tier2 or if tier 3 intervention is necessary. Teachers review student performance data on a regular basis and design units of study to meet the diverse needs of students while targeting grade-level /course standards. For the upcoming school year we are planning to monitor the progress of students at least once a month, and use the data to determine whether students still require intervention. For those still making insufficient progress, school-wide teams will design an intervention plan. We will provide training for teachers on how to collect and interpret student data on reading efficiently. Data-driven decision rules will be developed for providing differentiated instruction to students at varied reading and language proficiency levels for part of the day. Peer- assisted learning activities will be planned and organized carefully. Instruction will address both the social and academic aspects of working with a peer. Activities will focus on simple routines for lower grades, and vocabulary, reading practice and comprehension skills for the upper grades. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P.S.34Q uses many pieces of student data to evaluate and inform our ELL program. We look at outcome assessments as a final evaluation of student performance using the ELL Data Analysis Tool . This tool provides such student data from ATS including student biographical information, if they are at an at risk level, two years of NYSESLAT overall scores and breakdown of scores by domain, State ELA and Math assessment data. These results enable us to measure students progress and continue to address students academic needs. The percentage of Commanding and Expanding students increased significantly in 2017 NYSESLAT which shows that our ELLs are gaining proficiency and improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher meets regularly with classroom teachers and grade level leaders to discuss and share these findings as well as data from student samples and other assessments. We connect at grade level meetings, during lunch-and-learns, and through email conversations. With these findings, we will work together to adjust our program and to create learning plans tailored to target student needs. Each student is placed within the general education setting grouped with ENL peers with similar linguistic needs. Students are further grouped for ENL services to support their language development in reading, writing, speaking and listening. Within the classroom and ENL groupings all teachers further ensure linguistic needs are met by :- promoting cooperative learning, -using accountable talk stems during turn and talks, -teachers encourage students choice for writing topics and in independent reading,- teachers provide authentic resources for reading in fiction and informational, -providing students with hands-on experiences, technology is utilized through listening centers, smart boards, and computers (with specific software to enhance learning). 2018-19 CEP 51  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English Language acquisition. Students in freestanding ENL programs can come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. As per CR Part 154, we have two types of Freestanding ENL: Stand-Alone ENL is instruction to develop English Language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by two certified ENL teachers. Our full-time K-12 certified ESOL teachers provide instruction in STAND-ALONE ENL. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs after exiting ELL status receive a minimum number of integrated ENL. The ENL students are grouped according to their proficiency levels. Mandated number of minutes are provided to each student according to his/her proficiency level. Based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results the Entering and Emerging Level ELLs receive 2 units of study/360 minutes of ENL instruction per week . The students scoring at the Transitioning Level receive 1 unit of study/180 minutes of ENL instruction per week and Expanding level ELLs receive 1 unit of study/180 minutes of INTEGRATED ENL instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instruction is delivered in English with the home language support. The program model is organized by grade and proficiency level. All students are grouped heterogeneously. There is a wide range of proficiency levels in each group at each level. According to the test (NYSELAT or NYSITELL) results, students who scored ENTERING Proficiency Level will receive 2 units of study per week; 1 unit of study in Stand-Alone ENL, and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (Integrated ENL). Students who scored EMERGING level will receive 2 units of study per week; .5 unit of study in Stand-Alone ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (Integrated), and .5 unit of study can be Stand-Alone ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/Content Area. Those who scored TRANSITIONAL proficiency level will receive 1 unit of study per week; .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA ( Integrated ENL ), .5 unit of study can be STAND-ALONE ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/ Content Area. EXPANDING level students receive 1 unit of study per week in ENL/ELA or other Content Area ( INTEGRATED ENL ). Former ELLs must continue to receive services for an additional two years, .5 unit of study per week of INTEGRATED ENL in ELA or Content Area. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENTERING and EMERGING Level ELL groups focus largely on speaking, vocabulary development and familiarity with the conventions of the English language and the culture of the United States. Scaffolding activities are provided to support learning and are slowly withdrawn as the student gains proficiency in English. Some of the ways we accomplish this is through pictures, poetry, music, pupetry, TPR, role-playing, shared and guided reading and writing activities. We expose our beginners to a variety of language situations to assure that they maintain a low affective filter. The TRANSITIONING ELL groups focus on reading and writing in the content areas using comprehensible input. A balanced literacy approach is used in this instruction. Many of the methods used with the beginners are utilized here as well. In addition this group receives intensive instruction in writing mechanics and creative writing. We use Mondo Workshop Model to teach a variety of reading strategies. The four components of ESL are utilized to drive instruction with the EXPANDING Level ELLs. Reading comprehension, usage of advanced vocabulary, grammar and writing are thought through a thematic approach. A variety of subjects are explored to enrich the students' knowledge in social studies and science and engage them in a learning process. Assesments are done individually through conferencing. Rubrics are based on the Literacy/ Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program has been aligned with the Common Core Curriculum in both literacy and math. Literacy coach works in conjunction with the ENL teacher as well as classroom teachers of ELLs enhancing instruction. All teachers of ELLs in P.S. 34Q respect and build on the language and culture of ELLs by leveraging the linguistic and cultural resources they bring to the classroom. Also, teachers include different types of communicative activities embedded in academic settings and promote quality interactions by grouping and regrouping ELLs and English-proficient students regularly to maximize instruction and learning opportunities. The newcomers rely heavily on their native language and are encouraged to read to read and write in their native language until they can begin to understand and compromise their thoughts in English. Bilingual dictionaries are made available to them and they are encouraged to borrow books in their native language from the school and the public library. They are assigned a 'buddy' who can assist them and translate teacher directions and lesson summaries. In this way we can limit the amount of content area learning that is interrupted while they are learning English. Bilingual paraprofessionals also available if need arises. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL subgroups are heterogeneously grouped. There is a wide range of proficiency levels in each group at each level. Every child learns at a different rate and the groups reflect this diversity. Instruction is differentiated at all times for all students. P.S. 34 provides differentiated instruction to students at varied reading and language proficiency levels . Peer-assisted learning activities are planned and organized carefully, instruction address both the social and academic aspects of working with a peer. a) During 2015-2016 school year we are planning to help students with Interrupted Formal Education ( SIFE) accelerate academic and language development by providing additional instructional time before and after school as well as Saturday Academy. These students will be supported through AIS services, extended day and our Title III program. They will also be serviced through differentiated instruction in the general education classroom via guided reading and small group instruction. b) Our focus for ELLs who have been in US schools less than three years of ENL instruction is to provide reading comprehension, vocabulary development and familiarity with the conventions of the English language and the culture of the United States. Entering and Emerging level students are grouped to emphasize heterogeneous groups and differentiate instruction. Transitional and Expanding level students are grouped together; however, the instruction will be differentiated 2018-19 CEP 53  according to multiple learning abilities. c) Our focus for Developing ELLs will be on reading and writing. We are planning to support reading and writing in the content areas using comprehensible input.NYSESLAT results indicate that majority of our ELLs have difficulty in writing. These students will continue to receive at-risk supports such as extended-day programs, after school program, and Saturday Academy. d) Our plan for long-term ELLs (completed 6+ years)will receive AIS services, and all will stay for extended day. These students will strongly be encouraged to attend Saturday School. There the students will receive additional instruction in ELA and Math test taking strategies. Students who exhibit inadequate growth on reading assessments will receive an additional 30 minutes per day in literacy instruction using a reading intervention strategy focused on helping them to achieve grade-lvel proficiency in each essential reading component ( phonemic awareness, phonics, letter recognition, and writing). e) Our plan for former ELLs will be on transitional support. As per CR Part 154.2 Former ELLs will continue to receive the mandated services (which is 90 minutes per week) up to two years after exiting the ENL program. Classroom teachers will be notified of the student's status and testing accommodations. Extended time will be available to former ELLs ( 2 years out). In the younger grades former ELLs will be included in the AIS services if needed. Former ELLs in grades 3-5 will be encouraged to attend Saturday School so that mastery will be achieved on the State assessments. Also, students within the FELL sub-population are entitled to the same modifications on New York State exams afforded to students currently enrolled in our ENL program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A careful review of the IEP for ELL-SWD is necessary in order to assure that correct language instruction is being provided. Appropriate materials ( ENL textbooks to support writing, learner dictionaries, dual language dictionaries, speaking and listening resources, test prep resources for NYSESLAT, ELA and Math tests, and leveled story books both in native language and English) will be used in accordance to their educational plan. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use Bell Mondo reading and writing program which lends itself to small group instruction in lower grades. This program provides tremendous support for all ELL-SWDs in oral language and literacy development. The workshop model is used in every subject area so that all students' needs will be met. Small group instruction using academic rigor enables the children to get the help they need to advance the next level. Students within this subpopulation receive services to support not only their documented disabilities, but their language acquisition needs as well. Curriculum units incorporate UDL considerations and teachers are trained in a variety of strategies so that there is flexibility in decision making at the classroom level to support ELL-SWDs in meeting their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency. Currently, we are working on more efficient and effective conferring strategies in order to support the teachers to reach their students' individual goals. ENL schedules are created based on students linguistic needs. Through assessment, instruction and groupings are re-evaluated regularly and scheduling can be altered based on student need/growth. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs are provided with support in the least restrictive environment according to their IEPs. This may mean that the students are mainstreamed for certain content areas and provided with a more restrictive environment depending on the IEP. Common Core Standards will be incorporated into curriculum maps, grade conferences, and units of study Writing will be supported by guided writing, and daily writer's journals. Teachers will continue to use Guided Reading daily in the classrooms. Level 1 ( State Tests) students will receive AIS small group instruction for a minimum of 3 times per week. Level 2 students will be the target group for extended day, after school, and Saturday Academy programs. Level 3 and 4 students will participate in enrichment opportunities during and after school. Individual student goals will be created and utilized when planning lessons and delivering instruction so that all needs will be met. ELL-SWDs will be invited to participate after-school program. This program will focus on writing and ELA comprehension strategies. It will also increase time on task for individual and differentiated instruction. Assessment folders ( classroom teachers, AIS/SETTS providers) will reflect individualized student goals in ELA and benchmark targets. These goals will be updated to reflect successes and areas of concern after each unit of study.Student work and portfolios will be monitored for growth and utilizing rubrics, NYS ELA standards three times during the academic school year. P.S. 34 Q has an eager staff ready to service our ELL population. It is our belief that scaffolding upon the base of 2018-19 CEP 54  knowledge that each student possesses success will be imminent. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention services for ELLs are based on the students' scores on Acuity, Interim Assessments, Mondo assessments, E-Class and teacher evaluation. The ELL subgroups will be serviced through AIS, before and/or after school programs and Saturday Academy. Long term ELLs who needs assistance in Math will receive support as well.Some of the long-term ELLs were evaluated and it was determined that they receive Special Education services as well. All ELLs in grades 3-5 will be strongly encouraged to attend after school programs and Saturday School Academy. Programs have been established within the academic areas of ELA and Math. The intend of these programs is to help our students meet and/or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards assigned to their respective grades. Our goal, however, is to place special focus on our ELL population in order to maximize their English Language Acquisition, and to assist them in achieveing the state designated level of English proficiency for their grade. As a result, classroom teachers work closely with the Administrative and Instructional Teams in order to design targeted content area instruction that is tailored to the specific needs of ELLs and rooted in best instructional practices and ENL methodologies. At this time, all of our intervention programs have a strong ELA focus. Our AIS provider/within our RTI initiative will work with small groupings of students in grades three through five in 8 week cycles. In addition, our after school programs are beginning in November with students receiving related services in 6-8 week blocks with reassessment at that time. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are planning to use the same programs we used the previous school year. Looking at NYSESLAT data over the past two years, we have seen an increase each year in the number of students scoring Expanding and Commanding. Our current program addresses students' individual needs and promotes real life learning. Students are learning to read and write and problem solving strategies as outlined by the Common Core. Also, as per CR part 154, ENL teacher and classroom teachers plan together for Integrated ENL, we are starting to use common prep time for collaboration between ENL and classroom teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs /services will be discontinued for the upcoming school year. Over the past 4 years our students scored progresively better on the NYSESLAT each year. Since our ELLs were more successful than in previous years, we would like to continue the in-school and after-school programs ; however, we need to provide additional support to our ELLs and teachers in order for their growth to show on the ELA exam. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs will be afforded the same access to our before school, after school, Saturday school, and in school programs. All ELLs will receive the same support services as all other students in school such as counseling, occupational therapy and physical therapy. All these services are provided in English. Additional support services are; After-school Programs : 1 hour and 30 minutes of extra literacy and math support twice a week. AIS Intervention Programs : 35 minutes of instruction in reading comprehension and vocabulary development every day with our ENL teacher during Integrated and Standalone ENL . Resource Room : Extra help and support in all academic areas by the Resource Room teacher. School Music Program : Music program in which students can understand and respect different cultures through dance and music. All of the above programs and services are provided in English and all ELLs are invited and encouraged to participate in these programs. Our ELLs are included in all school wide programs. 2018-19 CEP 55  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Upper grade ELL groups use the Imagine Learning to practice and prepare for the state assessments. The lower grade ELL groups use Imagine Learning to gain familiarity with the alphabet, literacy skills and reading comprehension strategies. Listening centers are set up in the classrooms to provide auditory input and literacy practice. Every classroom has two computers that are available for all students to use as well as literacy based computer programs to support student learning. Computers are used to supplement content area instruction by adding video and audio support. Also 3 rd , 4 th and 5 th grade classroom are equipped with smart boards. The ENTERING and EMERGING Level ELL groups focus largely on speaking, vocabulary development and familiarity with the conventions of the English language and the culture of the United States. Scaffolding activities are provided to support learning and are slowly withdrawn as the student gains proficiency in English. Some of the ways we accomplish this is through pictures, poetry, music, puppetry, TPR, role-playing, shared and guided reading and writing activities. We expose our beginners to a variety of language situations to assure that they maintain a low affective filter. The TRANSITIONING ELL groups focus on reading and writing in the content areas using comprehensible input. A balanced literacy approach is used in this instruction. Many of the methods used with the beginners are utilized here as well. In addition this group receives intensive instruction in writing mechanics and creative writing. We use Workshop Model to teach a variety of reading strategies. The four components of ESL are utilized to drive instruction with the EXPANDING Level ELLs. Reading comprehension, usage of advanced vocabulary, grammar and writing are thought through a thematic approach. A variety of subjects are explored to enrich the students' knowledge in social studies and science and engage them in a learning process. Assessments are done individually through conferencing. Rubrics are based on the Literacy/ Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program has been aligned with the Common Core Curriculum in both literacy and math. Literacy coach works in conjunction with the ENL teacher as well as classroom teachers of ELLs enhancing instruction. All teachers of ELLs in P.S. 34Q respect and build on the language and culture of ELLs by leveraging the linguistic and cultural resources they bring to the classroom. Also, teachers include different types of communicative activities embedded in academic settings and promote quality interactions by grouping and regrouping ELLs and English-proficient students regularly to maximize instruction and learning opportunities. The newcomers rely heavily on their native language and are encouraged to read to read and write in their native language until they can begin to understand and compromise their thoughts in English. Bilingual dictionaries are made available to them and they are encouraged to borrow books in their native language from the school and the public library. They are assigned a 'buddy' who can assist them and translate teacher directions and lesson summaries. In this way we can limit the amount of content area learning that is interrupted while they are learning English. Bilingual paraprofessionals also available if need arises. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students receive all instruction in English with native language support such as bilingual dictionaries, native language classroom libraries, technology enrichment in the native language and the buddy system. Newcomers rely heavily on their native language. They are encouraged to read and write in their native language until they begin to understand and compose their thoughts in English. Bilingual dictionaries are made available and students are encouraged to borrow books in their own language from the school and public libraries. They are assigned a "buddy" who can assist them and translate teacher directions and lesson summaries. In addition, bilingual students, paraprofessionals and/or parent volunteers who speak the same primary language are available to provide tutoring, to read to the students in their primary language and to assist the students with publishing books written in their native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Data will be thoroughly reviewed and analyzed during common grade meetings and used to plan lessons, to differentiate instruction based on student needs, and to formulate flexible groupings of students needing enrichment (students above grade level), review and practice (on grade level students); reteaching (below grade level); and remediation( far below grade level). Additionally acquired data will be reviewed by administrators and our instructional team (grade leaders, RTI, ENL teachers and the Speech therapist) to plan and implement differentiated professional development within the school community. ELLs are receiving the required support and resources in correspondence with their age and grade level. ELLs receive instruction in a differentiated heterogeneous learning classroom setting. The students have the opportunity to work with their peers. The classroom libraries reflect different level and age appropriate content and a multitude of genres. 2018-19 CEP 56  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before beginning of the school year to help newly enrolled ELL students and parents make a smooth transition into school and ease their anxiety we have a welcome meeting with qualified interpreters available in parents preferred language. The parent coordinator calls and invites all newly-admit ELL students' parents to a "Welcome to P.S. 34 " meeting so the school staff ( administrators, guidance counsellor, classroom teachers as well as ENL teacher and service providers)can be introduced and the parents have a chance to ask questions. Since ELLs may enroll throughout the school year, many parents do not have the chance to attend the welcome meeting at the beginning of the school year. For those who enroll throughout the school year feel welcomed and get prepared for success in school we will present them with a "welcome kit". A "welcome kit" is a packet of school information and other supplies that will contribute to a positive beginning with relevant school information ( classroom location, teacher's name, school phone number and website, lunch information and lunch form, and school calendar). Pictures will be added for visual support. ENL teacher will go through the packet with the families and explain the items.Parents are provided opportunities to tour the building, mingle with the other new parents, and most importantly meet the next years classroom teacher. Another opportunity for new parents to become familiar with the school is 'the End of School Year Kindergarten Orientation'. The Principal, Assistant Principals, Pupil Personnel Secretary, PTA President, PTA members, parent coordinator, school nurse, teachers, guidance counsellor, RTI, Speech therapist, and ENL teacher speak with parents about school rules and routines, expectations, health related issues, HLIS and ENL program, PTA, school calendar and parent workshops. Orientation includes a school tour with an administrator and PTA members to feel the atmosphere of P.S. 34. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All programs and services are offered in English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 34Q doesn't have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL Staff development is explicitly designed to help teachers and other staff that serve ELLs effectively. P.S. 34 encourages all staff to participate in staff development focused on ELLs. Also, our school provides staff development opportunities for teachers and ELL personnel in effective instructional approaches to teaching ELLs and principles of second language acquisition. Our assistant principals will provide 2-hour sessions PD for the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to provide a better understanding of ELLs and their needs. Also, teachers will be instructed and trained of Mondo reading program, oral language development, and give an overview of the Writer's Workshop and pacing calendar. In order to meet professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teacher will be devoted to ELL-specific professional development. 2018-19 CEP 57  Professional Development opportunities are offered throughout the year to teachers of ELLs and ENL teachers in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. For the upcoming school year the planned professional development opportunities are : - How students learn language , both in terms of general language acquisition and in terms of the acquisition of discipline-specific academic language; - What kinds of linguistic expectations are embedded within specific texts and tasks with which students are being asked to engage; - How specific representations and instructional strategies can be used to help students gain access to the concepts as well as to the language they need to learn; - How classrooms can be organized to support students in continually building a deep understanding of language and content; - How to use rubrics that integrate ELA and ENL performance standards for writing; - How to examine NYSESLAT data to provide differentiated instruction to ELLs at varied reading and language proficiency levels; - How to support the development of the language practices needed to engage with the content found in the Common Core State Standards; - How to connect mathematical content with academic language to support ELLs mathematical practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school assists the ELLs in making a comfortable transition from elementary to middle school. In June, the middle school ( I.S.109) sends a group of students accompanied by the Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselor to our school. At this orientation meeting the students put on presentation about the different programs offered at the middle school. The Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselor review what is expected in regard to proper behaviour and attire. After this orientation fifth grade ELLs have several class sessions devoted to answering questions they have and discussing the presentation. There is also an evening program for all parents so that they can visit the school and ask any questions that they have. 4- The professional development plan at our school ensures the receipt of the 7.5 hours ( 10 hours for Sp.Ed and paraprofessionals) of strategies in teaching ENL as per Jose P. as well as CR 154.2 : 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development.We plan to devote two hours of the first two staff development days in September and two hours in November for ENL training. The staff will be instructed on how to better educate the English Language Learners.Lists of suggestions and strategies regarding alternative methods for teaching these children will be discussed. Testing accommodations will be explained and bilingual glossaries will be given to teachers and they will be shown how to utilize these on a daily basis. The remaining hours will be spread throughout the year and time will be devoted in January to discussing promotional policies and regulations for ELLs. Records( copies of agendas and attendance and hand-outs) for professional development activities are kept on file in the main office. Sensitivity training will be ongoing. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Families of ELLs are encouraged to become involved in their children's schooling. P.S.34Q will support parents of ELLs by: - providing materials and training to help them work with their children to improve their achievement level ( e.g. literacy, math and use of technology), 2018-19 CEP 58  - providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children, - fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child's progress, - providing assistance to parents in understanding City and State Standards and assessments, - sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in various languages that parents can understand, - providing opportunities to build stronger ties between parents and the school staff ( educational school events/activities throughout the school year such as Family Math Night, Family Science Night, Pajama Night , etc.). In September of the upcoming school year all families will be invited to school during open house week as well as " Meet The Teacher Night". During both events parents will be informed and shown different strategies to help their children at home. In October we will have two parent workshops and " Thanksgiving Sing Along" in November 2017 is for the lower and upper grade parents planned already. Our staff members and parent volunteers will be available for written and oral translations. Also, we use DOE translation and interpretation services. In addition to these workshops P.S. 34Q has two different days in which parents can meet with the Principal to discuss their needs and create a stronger home-school connection. All of these dates and events will be available on our school's monthly calendar. At the beginning of each month a copy of the calendar is sent home to parents to inform for all activities in parents' preferred language. In addition, annual individual meetings are scheduled with families/parents of ELLs through the ENL teachers and parent coordinator. Students program goals, language development progress, assessment results, and language needs are reviewed and discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents of the ELLs will be invited to attend several meetings throughout the 2015-2016 school year. During these meetings parents will be given updates on the students' progress. ESL teacher and parent coordinator will conduct these meetings with the participating parents. The parent coordinator will help the ELL parents to meet with the other parents, and join all the workshops. The parent coordinator also hosts many arts and crafts parent workshops, and inform and invite the parents to the workshops. Bilingual school staff will join the meetings for translation purposes. We plan to ensure the translation of PTA notices, monthly calendars, and open school invitations. In addition curriculum night announcements and information about extracurricular programs will also be translated into two major native languages. The parents will understand and be able to plan for all aforementioned activities. They will become more empowered and realize the importance of communication with their child's teachers and the school. P.S. 34 sends home specific tasks that parents can do with their children on a regular basis. Parents will develop a routine of expecting the communication and of completing the specific tasks assigned. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pauline Shakespeare, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John Harvard Elementary School DBN: 29Q034 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pauline Shakespeare Title Principal M. Lambert; V. Tomaselli Assistant Principal Jennie DeStephano Parent Coordinator Hamide Aktas, Michelle Turcios ENL/Bilingual Teacher Taeshyka Price Parent Nicole Chirco Katie Fariello N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jill Handley School Counselor Beverly Mitchell N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Kristin Gelman Other SETSS Samantha Maloney Other CB teacher N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 N/A N/A 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 N/A 02/02/2018 02/02/2018 N/A 2018-19 CEP 61 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: John Harvard Superintendent: Beverly Mitchell DBN: 29Q034 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Hamide Aktas ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for written communication, we sent a survey home to each of our students inquiring as to whether or not the parent or guardian needed translation services for notices sent home. We also took an inventory of the HLIS for the ELL’s in our program and an overview of the OTELE report and ATS report of Preferred Languages for our school. We then tabulated the number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a student’s academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enhance the parents’ understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. We found that the two major language groups were Haitian Creole and Spanish. We used our classroom surveys, blue card data, ATS report of preferred Languages, the inventory of languages from the HLIS and the OTELE report to assess the oral language needs of our parents. We assessed the number of parents who needed translation services to effectively communicate at PTA meetings, curriculum nights, and 2018-19 CEP 62  Parent-Teacher conferences. We determined that there was a need for a translator at these and other curriculum events held by the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Haitian Creole Arabic 463 26 25 16 87% 5% 5% 3% 463 26 25 16 87% 5% 5% 3% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School calendar Monthly Classroom Newsletter Weekly PTC announcements Progress Reports Report Cards Trip forms and Permission Slips Three times a year 4 times a year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We are planning to reach DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit at least 15 days prior to translate the monthly school calendar. School Staff who are native speakers will be paid to translate newsletters after school hours. DOE translation and Interpretation Unit has already translated documents DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit's website has translated versions of these forms and report cards. For non-cover language we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide November 2018 March 2019 Parent-Teacher Conferences May 2019 ELL Parent Meeting January 2019 Curriculum Nights Family Literacy November 2018 interpretation service(s)? All staff members are aware of how to use translation services and over-the-phone interpretation service.All teachers and staff received a copy of "I Speak ………" card which includes the phone number for over-the-phone interpretation. ENL teacher explained to all teachers and staff how to call T&I unit. The Assistant Principals will train all school staff by distributing T&I Brochure, Language ID Guide, Language Palm Card, Phone Number for interpretation services via the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the first staff meeting of 2018-2019 school year. After the staff meeting, the ENL teacher will inform classroom teachers of the students home languages, and the parents preferred language . We are planning to use in house interpreters as well. We are planning to use DOE L&I unit as well as bilingual staff members. Family Math December 2018 We will use in-house interpreters. 2018-19 CEP 64  Family Science Progress Meetings February 2019 October 2017 December 2017 February 2018 April 2018 Bilingual staff members and DOE L&I Unit over-the-phone interpretation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Two major language groups are Spanish and Haitian Creole, then comes Arabic, French, Bengali, and Punjabi. Home Language Identification Surveys show that most parents speak English and requested that both written and oral communication be made in English. A report with the languages that parents speak by class and grade was created and will be updated regularly by the ENL teacher. This report was placed in the main office. In case of a school emergency, we will ask bilingual school staff to reach limited-English-proficient families to inform and explain the procedures. If there aren't enough staff who speak other languages, Over-The-Phone Interpretation Service will be called. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P.S. 34 fulfills Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by ensuring that every parent who speaks a language other than English receives a copy of the monthly school calendar in the language of their choice. As mandated the availability of interpretation services as indicated through signs ( Welcome Poster, "I Speak ..." poster) are located near the main entrance of the school in an area that is visible to anyone entering and leaving the building. Also, language ID guide is placed on the security desk as well as the main office. Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access are distributed and explained to the parents during Parent Orientation Meetings. Translated versions of these booklets are also placed outside the main office for further needs. Our school safety plan includes specific procedures to give parent needed language access service which allow them to reach the administrative office without obstacles due to any language barriers. Based upon the Home Language Identification Survey responses, a master list of parent/home languages will be reserved in the main office. Also, we are planning to schedule a professional development session for school staff exclusively on translations and interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) For 2018-2019 school year P.S. 34 will meet identified interpretation needs by over-the-phone interpreters via the Translation and Interpretation Unit, and in-house by school staff. The notices announcing school events will be translated into the two major languages occurring in our school. Teachers, paraprofessionals and school aides who are native speakers will be paid to translate these documents after school hours. We plan to have interpreters in Haitian Creole and Spanish. They will be available to the parents for events such as PTA meetings, Family Literacy Night, Family Math Night and Parent-Teacher conferences. ELL parent orientation materials will also be provided in their native languages. The notices announcing these events will also be translated into the native language. This will enhance the parent’s understanding of their child’s academic performance and how to help improve their child’s achievement in school. This will also encourage more parents to attend PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences and open school week. We plan to ask teachers, paraprofessionals, and/or school aides to attend these functions. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, P.S. 34 will send parent survey after each planned event and meeting, post all the materials and pictures to the school website, develop information materials synthesizing the event and listing action steps for both the school and the parents moving forward, regularly invite parents back to talk further, develop rapid response e-mail system for parents to receive information and submit their thoughts. 2018-19 CEP 66 
