2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q035 School Name: P.S. 035 NATHANIEL WOODHULL Principal: MARK DEMPSEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Nathaniel Woodhull School 29Q035 Pre-K to 5 th Grade School Number (DBN): 90-11 191st Street, Hollis, NY 11423 718-465-6820 718-217-4314 Phone Number: Fax: Mark Dempsey mdempsey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Mark Dempsey Jonathan Licata TiffaneyGonzalez Email Address: Parents’ Association President: RozelleFredrick-Dabee SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michael Gonzalez n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: c/o P.S. 35, 90-11 191st Street, Hollis, NY 11423 bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-264-3146 Phone Number: 718-264-3148 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 8201 Rockaway Blvd, Queens, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mark Dempsey Jonathan Licata TiffaneyGonzalez N/A Michael Gonzalez n/a n/a LymariGotay TronLewis StaelEvariste Rozelle Dabee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Teacher Parent Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Ramlall Andrea A. Belcher RyojiMizutani PriyaPrashad VerdaleStinson Linda Banks Parent Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Parent Parent Parent Coordinator Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview School Mission Statement: “The staff, parents, organizations, and students of the Nathaniel Woodhull School are committed to fostering academic excellence. Our mission is to provide high quality instruction aligned to the Common Core. We are equally committed to nurturing the social and emotional needs of our students. We value the rich diversity of our community of learners." (September 2014) 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Nathaniel Woodhull School is an elementary school with approximately 700 students from grade pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 37% Black, 27% Hispanic, 5% White, and 24% Asian students. The student body includes 12% English language learners and 14% special education students. Boys account for 50% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 93.0%. In order to be more responsive to an increase in our students with IEPs and those with Special Needs, we have scheduled an Integrated Collaborative Teaching Class on every grade except kindergarten along with 1-2, 2-3 and 4-5 12:1:1 Bridge classes. Moreover, for our English Language Learners we have designated three “self-contained” ENL classes in kindergarten and first grade taught by teachers with ENL Licenses. Additionally, we have two ENL Teachers who will provide pull-out and push-in services on the other grades. Our strategic collaborations/partnerships include the Southern Queens Park Association for mental health services. We have partnered with Mathletics in an effort to increase our student progress in math numeration and fluency. Our Music Department works closely with Carnegie Hall and the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan. Our morning running program, the "Mighty Milers" and our regular participation in City-wide Track Jamboree Competitions builds on our partnership with the New York Roadrunners Foundation. We continue to work with the Junior Great Books Foundation to supplement our reading curriculum. Four of our teachers are enrolled in the Teacher Leadership Program to ready them for greater leadership roles within the school community. Our 4th Grade Ballroom Dancing program is supported by the "Dancing Classrooms" Organization. The projects and activities taking place in our Science Department are supported by Alley Pond Environment Center and the Suffolk County Wetlands Project. Parents are actively participating in a nutrition program sponsored by Cornell Cooperative Exchange. Additionally, we offer students after-school Friday spring clubs in academic, sports and arts for all of our K-5 students. Community Partnerships include: 103rd Police Precinct; Highway Patrol #3; Hollis Fire Dept; FDNY Fired Education Unit; Hollis Library; TD Bank; our local dentist Dr. Boodhoo; our local C-Town Supermarket; NY Roadrunners; Community Healthcare Network; Whitfield Martial Arts; Cambria Heights Academy coaches (basketball, double dutch, 2018-19 CEP 10  track); Council member Barry Grodenchik; local Soccer Club the "Rosedale Rockets"; Fight 2 Be Fit Fitness Program; Queens College Office of Student Teaching; our local Head Start. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have an extensive English as a New Language population, newcomers to the country with and without English and students with Disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made progress on building stronger Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Trust as evidenced in our School Survey. A key area of focus this year will be the building of a more rigorous academic program, particularly in writing. We have made progress on building stronger Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Trust as evidenced in our School Survey. A key area of focus this year will be the building of a more rigorous academic program, particularly in writing, for our ENL and Special Needs populations. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q035 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 706 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 48 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 17 28 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 83.4% % Reduced Lunch 13.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 7.5% 26.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.4 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 61 60 28 93.3% 5.7% 13.7% 35.0% 27.9% 8.1% 2 2% 8.2 40.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to feedback from our latest Quality Review, “Teaching practices inconsistently provide multiple entry points for all students including English language learners and students with disabilities. Some student work products and some student discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation. Impact: Not all students are engaged in challenging tasks and do not consistently demonstrate their thinking and participation across all classrooms and in work products.” Results on our New York State ELA and Math tests indicated that our school competed relative to the District and City-wide schools except for our 3rd grade in ELA significantly underperformed. As a result, we will redouble our efforts in ELA with the current 3rd and 4th graders and provide greater instructional support to the teachers in 2nd and 3rd grade. Monthly student writing samples will be collected as we take a closer look at student writing skills to assess and provide strategies and next steps for improvement. We will monitor reading progress through the use of our DRA reading assessments. We will measure student progress in math against the results of their Math-in-Focus baseline tests. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will continue to refine and revise our school's Curriculum Map (in Pre-K to 5th Grade) aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in support of all students including our SWDs and ELL students resulting in an increase of 5% growth in student performance as measured by the NYS ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A. The teachers on all grades continue to update our school's Curriculum Map and Units of Study in Literacy and Math to encompass all of the CCLS. We supplement the Reading Street literacy program with Schoolwide Writing and the Junior Great Books Program. B. Our School-wide Inquiry Team and Grade Teacher Teams review and monitor progress in Reading Street, Math-in-Focus Units, DRA reading levels and Writing Performance Tasks (as measured against the Writing Task Rubric). C. Teachers continue to create, refine and revise our Units of Study and Curriculum Maps based on the Common Core Learning Standards and the results of the baseline assessment in reading, writing and math along with monthly unit check-ups to identify areas of need. Teachers also use Lesson Studies as a means of PD's and Next Steps to improve the quality of lesson planning, instructional practices and student performance and progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Current 3rd and 4th graders. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Current 3rd and 4th graders. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Current 3rd and 4th graders. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Administration, Data Specialist, outside trainers and teacher leaders on each grade. Administration, Data Specialist, and teacher leaders on the various grades. Administration, Data Specialist, 3rd and 4th grade teacher teams with support from BFSC and outside trainers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will regularly conduct parent workshops on Tuesday afternoons, engage with parents one-on-one and in groups during Parent Engagement Time. We will set up special evening programs to assist parents with supporting their children's development of math and reading skills. We will fully engage with parents during our four Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled over the course of the school year. Our Interim Progress Reports in January and May will provide parents with additional information on rigorous instruction and academic expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. School professional development funds are used to hire the outside Mathletics, Junior Great Books, Schoolwide Inc. Writing, Math-in-Focus and Reading Street trainers. 2018-19 CEP 14  2. Time is allotted for teachers to work and plan together. 3. Time and resources are allotted for our Inquiry Team to regularly and frequently review student progress. 4. Teacher per sessions and Title III funds are allocated to support our ENLs who enroll in Saturday Academy. 5. This is part of our regular supervision. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration along with support from our BFSC and in close collaboration with the 3rd and 4th grade teacher teams will regularly review the quality of instruction, the tasks and projects, the level of questioning, in order to increase students'academic progress. Progress monitoring periods will be as follows: September, December, March and June. We will measure student growth by comparing student performance from last benchmark to the current benchmark. Each benchmark period will provide data on student learning and teacher practice to adequately inform and reform future instruction and set/ measure instructional targets. We will review DRA levels, Writing products, Math results, and Mathletics levels as a means of evidence that students are making gains towards meeting grade standard level of performance in the core subjects. Additionally, the Assistant Principal and Principal will review scores in various Danielson Domains in Advance to monitor strengths and weaknesses in teacher questioning, engagement, planning, assessment, etc. The final progress monitoring results will determine our attainment of this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration and the Core Curriculum Mapping Team will monitor the progress of grade teams to regularly update and implement the school's Curriculum Map. Each two months the Curriculum Mapping Team will review the lesson plans in the school's Curriculum Map to determine the horizontal and vertical alignment to the Common Core Standards and its responsiveness to what is taking place in the classrooms. Lesson studies will be used as a means of providing exemplary curriculum planning, modeling of best instructional practices and feedback to the instructional team leaders. We will measure this goal via observations with a focus on Domains 1 and 3 and by sampling /sharing quality lesson plans to support teacher performance and effective pedagogy. Improved instruction and student progress in all classes indicates that we attain this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on teacher feedback during our June 7, 2018 Planning & Reflection Day, many teachers continue to request support with effectively addressing students who continue to experience behavioral challenges. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a school community our teachers, school administrators and School Assessment Team will improve school tone and student behavior. We will continue to implement social-emotional programs, notably PBIS, TCIS De-escalation and Restorative Circles. Additionally, we will implement Respect for All curriculum and use Class Dojo to monitor and motivate students experiencing behavioral challenges. In doing so, we will provide greater structure, strategies and support for these students resulting in a decrease by 10% in incidents as recorded in OORS. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A. Regular and frequent meetings with the school’s School Assessment Team, School Administrators, PBIS Coach, PBIS Team, Four Rs Team and Parent Coordinator to better clarify the process for the development of BIPs and FBAs, their monitoring and application . B. Involvement of the Teachers, Administration, Paraprofessionals, Safety Agent, Main Office Staff, School Aides, Kitchen Staff, PTA Officers, Parent Coordinator, Custodial Staff and Parent Volunteers in the application of the PBIS Rubrics and distribution of PBIS awards, i.e., Stars and Starbucks, to reinforce appropriate behavior and effort. C. Ongoing training of and discussions with Teachers, Educational Assistants, Parent Coordinator, School Assistants, Main Office staff, Kitchen Staff conducted by the PBIS Coach and PBIS Team with support from the Principal and Assistant Principal. D. The Safety Team and School Assessment Team will monitor the effectiveness of the BIPs and FBAs, the PBIS Program, and overall tone of the school. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 2018 through June 2019. October 2018 through June 2019. Oct. 2018 through June 2019. Oct. 2018 through June 2019. Students identified through OORS as requiring greater social-emotional support. Students identified through OORS as requiring greater social-emotional support. Students identified through OORS as requiring greater social-emotional support. Students identified through OORS as requiring greater social-emotional support. 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will promote and explain further our PBIS framework to parents during one-on-one, small group interactions. During PTA Meetings. As a regular part of our SLT monthly meetings. During Parent Engagement Tuesdays and Parent-Teacher Conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Time has been scheduled into the PBIS Coach’s schedule. 2. This is part of the School Assessment Team, Administration, PBIS Coach and Safety Team’s responsibilities. 3. The School Implementation Team which meets every two weeks will look closely at the effectiveness of the BIPs and FBAs.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As part of the PBIS Team's regular duties, once the team is assembled, members will review students in need of greater support and times/places where OORS incidents occur. The Safety Team, in tandem with the PBIS Team, will monitor incidents and areas of concern. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of incident reports during monthly Safety Meetings and during PPT meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our latest Quality Review, “The majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that consistently analyze assessment data and student work. Impact: Structured professional collaborations strengthen teacher capacity and progress toward mastery of goals for groups of students.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage in Affinity Groups and participate in ongoing Teacher Teams based on the needs of the school and interests of the teachers to improve pedagogy, practice and student progress. This effort will be reflected in an increase in Questioning and Discussion (3B), Engagement (3C) and Assessment (3D) in the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. A. School administration schedules professional development opportunities for teachers to improve teaching practices by deepening understanding of the eight key components of the Danielson Framework against which the teachers are rated, particularly in questioning and discussion techniques. B. Training includes “Affinity Groups,” collaborative learning during Monday afternoon sessions, viewing teaching videos in Engageny, support from the Borough Field Office and outside trainers. C. Teachers engage in class inter-visitations and collaborative learning sessions around “Accountable Talk” and “reciprocal conversations.” Teachers will apply Depth of Knowledge in creating rigorous tasks and designing higher order thinking questions in their instruction. Teachers will visit other schools identified as having model instructional practices. D. Professional Development topics will be selected by teacher choice via surveys and needs based on observations, performance and goals. Some toois will include:Looking at students work to inform teaching and learning in ELA, Math and Writing, Ramping up instruction to increase rigor, Response to Intervention Strategies, Teacher Leadership Styles, Writing Quality IEP's, Mathletics, Using Data- Item's Analyses o Drive Instruction, Assessing the assessment, Deconstructing the Standards, Writing and Deconstructing Teaching Points, The Art of Questioning and reciprocal discussions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal, assistant principals, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher and Team Teachers (on every grade except kindergarten) will further explain to parents the notion, philosophy and approach of team teaching throughout the course of the academic year. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Evidence of on-going professional development is provided by the Principal and Assistant Principal and various staff members during weekly Professional Collaborative Learning sessions each Monday September 2018 through June 2019. Inter-visitations are scheduled one period per week for targeted support as needed. 2. The supervisor meets one-on-one with each teacher to engage in an End-of-Year Conference for at least 15-minutes during a predetermined time period that can be scheduled during a preparation period or before and after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have developed their own Professional Learning Plan to include a path to improving their questioning and discussion techniques. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and minutes from training sessions with clear targets for implementation confirmed by administration through informal class observations, feedback discussions and reviewing of lesson plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our scores on our students’ 2017-18 NYS Exams showed that our 4th graders outperformed both the District and City in ELA and Math. Our 3rd and 5th graders, in contrast, compared poorly to the District and City, particularly in Math. The trend we are seeing in the third grade performance indicates that skills must be secure in Grade 2 in order to continue to grow in Grade 3 and beyond. Interventions including RTI and flexible small groups will be used along with Push in SETSS and Reading to aide in achieving improved student progress. We are creating a collaborative environment where teachers also support teachers via planning rigorous instruction to be shared amongst the grade and leading workshops and meetings as valued members and stakeholders., Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-5 will make a 5% increase overall percentage on the New York State ELA and Math Exams. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A. Students in Grades 3-5 who are performing below standard will be offered 10 Saturday Academy sessions. Pre- and post-tests will be used to drive instruction. B. Small group and targeted reading and math intervention for 3rd and 4th graders will be provided by our Reading Intervention Specialist and former Math Coach. C. We will look closely at student work to inform and reform planning and instruction. Emphasis will be placed on Danielson Domains 1 and 3. D. Students will be assessed during instruction as well as at the end of the lesson using various assessment tools to measure their understanding. Students will be expected to articulate, locate and demonstrate evidence of learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement January 2019 through March 2019. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. October 2018 through June 2019. October 2018 through June 2019. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will regularly conduct parent workshops, particularly on Tuesday afternoons, to promote parent leadership. We will send home flyers to recruit parent volunteers and speak to the need for parent leadership in various school activities at our monthly PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. All teachers have at least four common Preps weekly for planning, looking at data and collaborating for student success. 2. Teachers have provided input on supplementary instructional supports that have been purchased to support our students' progress and teachers' preparedness. 2018-19 CEP 23  3. Teachers are offered P.D. opportunities to strengthen and enhance their pedagogy in areas that they have identified as a need or interest. They are also provided P.D. opportunities based on observations and one to one discussions as a means of feedback and support in improving pedagogy and student performance and progress. 4. Teachers are provided opportunities to practice, reflect, revisit and reform best practices in our effort to improve teaching and learning outcomes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will begin in September and take place in: December, March and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year data analysis of DRA reading levels and progress made since Sept 2018. Regular review of quality of student writing by grade teams and administration. Final scores from State tests, DRA and Performance Tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our most recent Quality Review, “School leaders consistently emphasize a culture of learning by communicating high expectations to the entire staff. School leaders and staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness and successfully partner with parents. Impact: A culture of mutual accountability, collaboration, and buy-in is evident among all staff. School leaders and staff successively join with families to support student independence, progress and ownership of learning.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through a program of improved communication and outreach to parents, School Survey data will indicate that five percent more parents have regularly received information about their child’s progress on an ongoing basis. This will include:weekly Family Engagement Meetings, Parent Workshops, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Class Dojo and Remind- Instant Classroom or individual text messenger system. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A. Using Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement Time to conduct regular outreach to parents through one-on-one meetings, phone calls, letters, emails, e-class pages and class newsletters. B. Conducting parent workshops on teaching/learning on Tuesday afternoons. C. Interim Common Core aligned Progress Reports distributed to parents in January and May. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Sept. 2018 through June 2019. January 2019 and May 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Allocated budget: Title l Funds , Grants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will begin in September and take place in: January, May and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 26  Formal surveys to parents in January and May 2019 on parents' level of understanding and awareness about their child's progress. Informal surveys during January and May PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 40 20 0 0 10 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group small group small Group and one -to -one 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. approximately 43 Extra counseling, outreach to local shelters by Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and Parent Coordinator. provision of school uniforms, school supplies and bookbags. Setting up transportantion, providing support to parents and families via C>O's including SQPA, providing resources for students and parents to engage in school and events/programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. uncertain at this time. 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our Borough Field Office’s HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR Director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to recruit, retain and support highly qualified teachers are indicated below: • We screen resumes for license requirements and qualities befitting our job descriptions. • We work with our Human Resources Director to identify highly qualified teachers when vacancies occur. • We have initiated a relationship with near-by colleges, e.g., Queens College, by regularly hosting Student Teachers. • A Hiring Committee comprised of teachers, administration and parents invites candidates into the school, whenever possible, to observe candidates deliver demonstration lessons. In July, in some cases, teacher candidates are invited to deliver their demonstration lessons at summer school. The Hiring Committee then interviews all candidates. • Administration conducts weekly grade conferences based on planning and instructional delivery. • Administration conducts frequent and routine informal observations sessions accompanied by feedback sessions. • Administration conducts one-on-one coaching sessions with new teachers. • New teachers are assigned mentor teachers to meet with twice weekly. • Experienced teachers are sent to monthly workshops sponsored by the Borough Field Office and are responsible for turn-keying that information to their colleagues. • Those teachers who are not Highly Qualified will have the opportunity to conduct the requisite coursework with financial support from P.S. 35’s budget. 2018-19 CEP 31  • The Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the Borough Field Office HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. • Administration participates in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. • The Hiring Committee interviews HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. • The Hiring Committee establishes a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our "Marvelous Monday" professional development sessions are based on the instructional needs of the school and the teachers, based on student achievement data relative to the Common Core State Standards. The development of the school's overall and specific professional development plan for teachers and paraprofessionals begins with a detailed Learning Survey. Out of this Learning Survey emerges teachers' areas of self-identified growth. It also manifests educators' areas of instructional leadership. it also shows how educators learn best. The results of this Learning Survey combined with student achievement data helps the Professional Development Committee (administration teamed with a representative from each grade) develop a comprehensive, responsive, differentiated, flexible and effective training plan. • Teachers are provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities to ensure that they improve their teaching practice as per ADVANCE and Danielson and are highly qualified. • Teachers are encouraged to participate in Lunch and Learns, after school PDs and to attend off-site workshops when appropriate. • Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. • Carefully made teacher assignments are designed to match teacher talent with school needs. In the very rare event, if a teacher’s status is deemed not HQT, the principal consults with the network Human Resources Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher will meet all required documentation and teacher assessment deadlines. This includes some form of counseling including encouraging the teacher to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). As a neighborhood school we enroll students from zoned neighborhoods. We will form a PreK-to-K Transition Team including the Principal, AP Early Childhood, School Counselor, IEP Teacher, the Parent Coordinator, and parents (if applicable) who will work collaboratively to assist pre-school children as they transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. The team will meet monthly to track student data trends and evaluate overall readiness. Eligible students will be provided with early intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, Pre-K teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from Pre-K to kindergarten. To ensure seamless transitions, the expectation is that our Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers will engage in Lunch and Learns regarding CCLS for Early Childhood grades. Our school embraces a Parents-As-Partners model through professional development opportunities and parent engagement activities that increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen their understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. The Pre-K-to-Kindergarten Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the process and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood Pre-K program to the Kindergarten elementary school program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a neighborhood school we enroll students from zoned neighborhoods. We will form a PreK-to-K Transition Team including the Principal, AP Early Childhood, School Counselor, School Psychologist, PreK Social Worker, IEP Teacher, the Parent Coordinator, and parents (if applicable) who will work collaboratively to assist preschool children as they transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. The team will meet monthly to track student data trends and evaluate overall readiness. Eligible students will be provided with early intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, PreK teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from PreK to kindergarten. To ensure seamless transitions, the expectation is that our PreK and Kindergarten teachers will engage in Lunch and Learns regarding CCLS for Early Childhood grades. Our school embraces a Parents-As-Partners model through professional development opportunities and parent engagement activities that increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen their understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. 2018-19 CEP 33  The PreK-to-K Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the process and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood PreK program to the Kindergarten elementary school program. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sect.7, Part B Sect.5, Part 4 Section 5, Part 2 Section 5, Part 1b Section 5, Part 1b Section 5, Part 2 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 321,692.00 125,684.00 11,432.00 12,622.00 3,424,762.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Nathaniel Woodhull School (P.S. 35), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Nathaniel Woodhull School (P.S. 35) will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Nathaniel Woodhull School (P.S. 35), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 38  Achieve State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: • Rationale - Intensive instructional support will be given to all ELL students and former ELL students in grades 3 – 5 to provide ENL enrichment and test taking strategies for the NYS ELA and the NYS Mathematics Exams. Parent notification letters will be distributed in English and parents home language. Attendance will be collected by the parent coordinator. Letters of communication, phone logs and parent notification letters will be kept in the administrator's office. • Subgroups and grade levels to be served - Grades 3-5 will be served, ELL students will be grouped according to English proficiency levels: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Commanding and Proficient. This includes 39 current ELL students and 21 former ELL students. • Schedule and duration – The Saturday Academy will consist of 10 Saturday sessions running from 8:30 to 12:00 and two sessions during the Spring Break (depending on staff availability) in April from 8:30am to 12:00pm. • Language of instruction – Instruction will be delivered in English. • # and types of certified teachers – There are five groups of students of approximately 15 students per group, grouped according to proficiency level and grade. A Common Branch Teacher is assigned to each group. There are also four certified ENL teachers who co-teach with each of the five teachers on a 60-minute rotating basis. The ENL Teacher provides the explicit language development to support the content development provided by the Common Branch teachers. Joint co-planning each morning of Saturday Academy ensures that lessons are cohesive. • Types of materials – “Buckle Down” will be used for mathematics instruction and “New York Ready - English Language Arts Practice” will be used for instruction in reading, both aligned to the Common Core Standards. Our SIFE, Long Term ELLs, Newcomers and SWD will be using the Imagine Learning software program for further support and enrichment. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 43  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Professional development will be provided during our extended day on Mondays and during our Saturday program for teachers in our Title III program. These sessions will provide scaffolding techniques and language acquisition techniques for the ELA, Math and NYSESLAT assessments for our ENL population. We will provide three one-hour sessions. Professional development will be provided by a member of our Language Proficiency Team (LPT). Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by a member of the LPT. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: • Rational: Parent workshops will help parents improve their language skills and get familiar with the culture. Parent support sessions and workshops will be held bi-weekly. This will include the use of the "Book of the Month" to support students classroom instruction, instructional workshops and interest-based/creative workshops. Guest speakers will also be invited to provide support for parents from students services to career education. Sessions will be held at various times of the day to accommodate parents' schedules as well as during our parent engagement time on Tuesdays and prior to PTA meetings for working parents. Topics will include: How to get assistance for your child, Guidance and procedures, Instructional support- content/grade/ standards, and Homework helper, Learning to Read through the Arts, Multicultural Education, "Let's Talk and crochet" and educational based social functions to build sense of community and belonging. The Assistant Principal will take the lead in developing a Parent Support Services Center. Members of the team will include : The Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor School’s Social Worker two Classroom Teachers The Title l Parent Representative one School Educational Assistant one School Assistant and the Principal. We will also invite CBO’s such as New York Cares, Horizon and Jamaica Partnerships to work with parents on topics including : Finances, career development and health and counseling services. We are currently conducting a Parent survey to better address the needs of our parents. However, some projected workshop titles include: • Developing Oral Language fluency for parents. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities • Parents Book of the Mont Club (Using the school-wide Book of the Month to foster students and parents having book talks at home.) • Literacy skills development and reading through the arts. • Homework helper • Understand the process to better support my child- “Guidance and Procedures Seminars.” • Projects and activities- art projects, decopauge, story quilting Sessions will be lead by the Parent Support Center Committee, staff members and possible CBO guests. Notices will be sent home advising parents of these session along with phone invitations by members of the team. Bi-weekly sessions will begin effective February 11th through mid June 2016. Sessions will be canceled during State Testing Periods.ill be conducted in to help parents to improve language skills, Additionally parents with strategies that they can use to help their child prepare for the NYS ELA and Math State Tests. Additionally, they will be conducted periodically throughout the school year during Tuesday Parent Engagement Time by our lead ENL Teachers Farah Khan and Rozelle Dabee. How parents will be notified of these activities -- Letters will be sent home in students’ native languages inviting parents to attend workshops based on their child’s grade level. Parent letters, agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Eight teachers, one administrator, two Assistant Teachers, Parent Coordinator, one School Assistant, Guidance Counselor, School Social Worker will be involved over nine Saturday sessions. PD will be provided to the teachers as part of Professional Salaries. $2,300 Will use Perfection Learning materials. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $11,837  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2018-19 CEP 45 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. No additional software will be needed. no travel required Travel Other TOTAL 0 14,137 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name P. S. 35Q Borough Queens School Number 035 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mark Dempsey Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Farah Khan and Rozelle Dabee Teacher/Subject Area Asuncion Ramos (K) Teacher/Subject Area Catalina Dosil (1st Grade) Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Andrea A. Belcher and R Coach n/a School Counselor Ketline Glemaud Parent type here Parent Coordinator Linda Banks Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Rousseau Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 Total number of ELLs 100 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Diagnostic Reading Assessments (DRA), Imagine Learning and Star Renaissance to trace the progress of the ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 48  We look at the progress our ELLs make year to year in the NYSESLAT, NYS Science, NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics Assessments. Also their DRA levels and their scores on the baseline assessments in literacy and mathematics in the testing grades. Baseline assessments are also given from the Reading Street program. A coordinated approach by the classroom teachers and ENL teachers, particularly in reading, inform next steps and instructional strategies. We monitor Imagine Learning usage and progress along with Star Renaissance assessments in reading and math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We will support our students with small group instruction in our after school program 2 days a week. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction and prepare for small group instruction and differentiation within our reading block. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In Grade 1, the majority of our ELL students are at the advanced level. Over 40% of our ELL population are on the advanced level of English proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have two program models. We have a freestanding model and three self-contained classes. We employ the Pull-Out program with content area development using ESL strategies implementing the Language Allocation Plan and 100% English instruction but with the students' native language valued and encouraged. In our pull out program, the students are grouped heterogeneously based on levels of English proficiency. Entering students are grouped with low level emerging students, high level emerging students are grouped with transitioning students and expanding students are grouped together. In the three self contained classes, grade K, 1, and 2 ELL students are grouped together. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction as per CR Part 154. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction as per CR Part 154. 2018-19 CEP 49  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our explicit ENL instructional model emphasizes the NYS ENL standards and performance indicators in addition to explicit skills instruction and labeling language as it pertains to the related content areas. The ENL teachers coordinate use of ENL strategies with general education classroom teachers; i.e., scaffolding, TPR, use of graphic organizers visuals, etc. Entering level ELLs receive instruction emphasizing listening and speaking skills, while other levels emphasize reading skills and writing mechanics. All instruction is provided in English. The ENL teacher provides content area support using Sidewalks by Reading Street, Imagine Learning, and Star Renaissance. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The school understands the importance of native language. State tests are ordered in Spanish and Haitian Creole and materials are translated if necessary. The Spanish LAB-R is given to entitled students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently P. S. 35 has one SIFE student. SIFE students participate in our Saturday Academy Program. They receive small group instruction in the content areas and are assigned to a student mentor for extra support in their native language. b. Our newcomers receive differentiated instruction both in the ESL and in the general education classroom in literacy and the content areas. Emphasis for these students is an auditory and oral skills. In addition, there is an eight week Saturday Academy instructional support program for grades 3 - 5 that is designed to meet their educational needs in order to prepare them for the NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics assessment. c. ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years receive their ENL minutes of instruction as per CR Part 154. These students also use a technology based instructional program Imagine Learning. These students also attend our Saturday Academy Program and ENL After-School Tutoring Program. d. This year we do not have any long-term ELL students who have completed 6 or more years. e. Former ELL students who are proficient in English are given time and half during testing. They also attend our Saturday Academy Program and ENL After-School Tutoring Program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our two full-time ENL teachers are in communication with the ELL-SWD teacher, SETTS teacher, the guidance counselor, as well as the SBST regarding any student with an IEP. ELL-SWD are also mainstreamed in the content areas of reading and mathematics to accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teachers and other staff members also implement appropriate strategies that are required for curriculum and testing modifications. The diverse needs of ELL-SWDs are met using small group instruction in English, mainstreaming in reading and mathematics and small group instruction in our Saturday Academy Program and (proposed) ENL After-School Tutoring Program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 50  Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, mathematics, science and social studies are provided for expanding, transitioning, emerging and entering students. Students receive small group instruction in reading and mathematics. ELLs in grades 3 - 5 attend our Saturday Academy Program which provide intensive preparation for the NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics Assessments. These intervention services are offered in English. ELLs in grades K-5 will attend our (proposed) ENL After-School Tutoring Program for the 2018 - 2019 school year, depending on available funding. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be improving the Saturday Academy Program and the ENL After-School Tutoring Program for the 2018 - 2019 school year. We have initiated two self-contained ENL classes in kindergarten and first grade. These students are receiving services from ENL state certified teachers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL population are afforded equal access to all school programs through letters which are translated in their native language and through parent contact/meetings. ELLs participate in our Saturday Academy Program and our (proposed) ENL After-School Tutoring Program. ELLs also participate in our extracurricular activities including the School Band, Friday Clubs, Fit for Life and Mighty Milers morning exercise programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include Imagine Learning for grades K-5 (all levels) which includes a technology component, Spotlight on Reading and Listening comprehension (technology based) for grades 3-5 (transitioning and expanding ELLs). Reading Street materials are used throughout the school for grades K-5 which includes an ENL component for our ELL population. ELL students are also supported by Star Renaissance and Imagine Learning which are technology based. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in ENL through visuals, TPR, shared reading, grouping and repetition. Reading Street materials are used throughout the school for grades K - 5 which includes a supplemental reader titled "My Sidewalks on Reading Street" which is used for our ELL population in grades 1, 4 and 5. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Upon registration, parents or guardians must provide documentation of previous educational history of ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support ELLs include Imagine Learning for grades K-5 (all levels) which includes a technology component, Spotlight on Reading and Listening comprehension (technology based) for grades 3-5 (transitioning and expanding ELLs). Reading Street materials are used throughout the school for grades K-5 which includes an ENL component for our ELL population. ELL students are also supported by Star Renaissance and Imagine Learning which are technology based. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELL students that are enrolled in June are invited to attend the ELL Summer School Program at P. S./I.S. 268 to receive extra support in the content areas before the opening of the new school year. Our Parent Coordinator Linda Banks will be involved to ensure transportation for these students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 51  n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided both in-house, outside sessions and on-line for our ELL personnel. These sessions are on-going throughout the school year. Information is provided in weekly updates and newsletters to inform ELL teachers of upcoming professional development and deadlines. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our fifth grade staff are given support by our Guidance Counselor Ms. Glemaud to help our fifth grade students make a successful transition into middle school. In order to meet professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, teachers are requested to sign in during professional developments. Attendance and agendas records are kept on file in our Main Office in each teacher's file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of our ELL students are scheduled to meet with classroom teachers on Tuesdays during our parent engagement sessions 2:20 - 3:15 to discuss goals of our programs, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Interpreting support is provided according to parental needs by our staff members, including our bi-lingual Educational Assistants. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. For our parents who speak a language other that English, we try to communicate and accommodate their needs through our bi-lingual staff who assist in parent/teacher meetings, use of the DOE interpreting phone service, at parent/teacher conferences, at PTA meetings and via notices which go home in multiple languages. 2018-19 CEP 52  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mark Dempsey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Nathaniel Woodhull School School DBN: 29Q035 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mark Dempsey Andrea A. Belcher and Ryoji Mi Linda Banks Farah Khan and Rozelle Dabee Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Asuncion Ramos Teacher/Subject Area Catalina Dosil Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ketline Glemaud School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Marie Rousseau Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 2/15/18 2/15/18 2/15/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q35 School Name: 035 Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Farahnaz Khan ENL Teacher no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Review of Home Language Surveys and interview conversations by Administration with staff, particularly our ENL Teachers, bilingual educational assistants and Parent Coordinator, on translation/interpreting needs of our parents/guardians. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Based on the Home Language Surveys and Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 56  number of ELL students, well over 10% of our students speak a language other that English in the home. Languages in terms of numbers are: (1) Spanish; (2) Bengali; and (3) Haitian/Creole. We communicate our findings both formally and informally through the School Based Support Team, our ENL teachers, our multi-lingual staff members, our multi-lingual parent leaders and in notifications letters home. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates annual school handbooks and parent-teacher conference announcements in the Fall and Spring to the DOE Translation Dept. for assistance. For official backpack notices generated by DOE Central, we send home the notices in the Home Language, coordinated under the direction of our ENL teachers. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings are conducted in our school during September for our Back to School Night and our parent-teacher conferences in the fall and spring. We also conduct informal meetings throughout the year on Tuesdays 2:20 - 3:15 during our parent engagement sessions. In addition our guidance counselor is fluent in both Haitian Creole and French to communicate with parents/guardians. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, P. S. 35 communicates with families using in-house staff members who are able to translate. We also use the Translation and Interpretation Unit phone services provided from the NYC Department of Education.. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our staff will be provided with training on the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during our professional development sessions on Mondays which is on-going throughout the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 58  Our Language Access Coordinator (LAC) and parent coordinator will coordinate translation and interpretation support to limited-English-proficient parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our schools will use parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services during the school year. 2018-19 CEP 59 
