2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q037 School Name: CYNTHIA JENKINS SCHOOL Principal: PASCALE BENJAMIN-PEREIRA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Cynthia Jenkins School 29Q037 342900010037 Pre-K to Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 179-37 137 Avenue, Springfield Gardens, NY 11434 (718)528-5399 Phone Number: (718)949-0887 Fax: Pascale Benjamin-Pereira pbenjam@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Pascale Benjamin-Pereira Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nanetta Smith Shaun Hall Diane Sancho None HerceliaOwens District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 191-02 90 Avenue, Queens, NY 11423 Superintendent’s Office Address: bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)217-7740 Phone Number: (718)217-7739 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) South Queens Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@school.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646)522-7133 Phone Number: (718)348-2997 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Pascale Benjamin-Pereira Nannetta Smith Shaun Hall Diane Sancho Makeda Gadson None None Antonia Danzine Iesha Santana Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBORepresentative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sarah Howard FabiolaCastrillo Dorothy Timpico Ann Bristol Lorraine Marlow Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is high standards with support for all students to achieve their personal best. Our school motto is students, teachers, parents and community members collaborate to foster a nurturing environment where all students succeed. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS37Q is a diverse school community that encourages students, staff, parents and community organizations to contribute to the core value of pursuing excellence in education. Staff and parents go above and beyond with a spirit of giving back creating a culture of collaboration, pride and resilience. We encourage our students to think critically, problem solve collaboratively and persevere to meet individual goals. The needs of our students are met based on ongoing meetings with teachers who recommend enrichment as well as academic intervention services. Enrichment programs as well as academic/social emotional support are provided during school, after school or on Saturdays. The enrichment programs provide students with additional art, technology and sports opportunities. The academic intervention programs includes small group or one to one support to develop literacy and math skills. Parents are provided multiple opportunities to participate in the process of meeting the needs of their child. PS37Q empowers parents using orientations, a parent handbook, a beginning of school year packet and progress reports to keep parents informed. Monthly parent engagement workshops are offered by the parent coordinator, teacher teams, assistant principal and principal. Our staff includes members who speak various languages making our school a welcoming environment for all. The majority of our families (95%) prefer to communicate in English while some families prefer languages other than English to include Spanish, Haitian Creole, Arabic, Bengali and French. Services for students who are English language learners are provided on a pull-out/push-in basis as well as during after school and/or Saturday programs. Our collaboration with the New York Junior Tennis league provide many parent of students in kindergarten to grade 5 with after school services involving time for homework, sports and the arts. In addition, enrichment programs include a dance club, a technology club, a basketball team, theater, our student government and a student volunteer program and are provided using organizations such as Inside Broadway, Jamaica Art Center and Service in School. Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) and Sanford Harmony are used school-wide to meet the social emotional needs of our students. The school collaborates with local organizations and businesses. Special Initiatives Planned for the 2018-2019 School Year: ELA and Mathematics Progress Monitoring Teacher teams and the Instructional/Curriculum Team will review, update and adapt both ELA and Mathematics curricula with a focus on phonics for grades K-1, reading comprehension strategies in all grades, grammar, the use of math manipulatives and problem solving. Monthly common assessments will be used for school-wide monitoring of student performance. The Instructional/curriculum team will generate common assessments based on standards. Teachers will use monthly common assessments in additions to other student work to provide additional support to their students. The School Assessment teams will collaborate with teachers to support with implementing the ladder of referral for students with needs of additional academic or behavior support. Grade level teacher teams meet weekly and use a standard protocol to examine student work and for common planning. This collaboration aims at developing coherence in instruction by facilitating the sharing of teachers' instructional practices that effectively address the school's mission and instructional focus. Monthly data meetings are focused on identifying school-wide progress and instructional next steps. 2018-19 CEP 10  PBIS The school-wide PBIS will continue to focus on BEST (Be Respectful, Effort, Self-control and Teamwork) using award assemblies and positive reinforcements. This initiative is led and monitored by a teacher team with the goal of celebrating students monthly for positive contributions to the school environment to reinforce core values that will promote lifelong social emotional and academic success. The 100 Book Campaign: Pre-Kindergarten through 5th Grade students are participating in our 100 Book Campaign Challenge. Our goal is for our students to consistently read a variety of texts within different genres. Celebrations will be planned for students who have read at least 25 books per quarter. At the end of the school year we will recognize the top readers in each grade and the top school reader. The Powerful Writing Team of PS37Q recognizes students showing effort in writing weekly. How to help your child become a powerful writer will be the focus of monthly parent meetings with the principal. Performances: Ceremonies and assemblies will be held regularly to celebrate students in Pre-K through grade 5. Award assemblies take place monthly to recognize students' strengths. During these ceremonies, students are presented awards in academics, citizenship and the arts. Grade-wide and club performance assemblies will be held to provide students opportunities to engage in The Performing Arts. School performances are culminations of the learning with a focus on winter festivities, black history, women’s history and diversity. Parent and Community Collaboration: PS37Q aims to foster strong family-community ties by inviting parents and community partners to join our mission in many ways. Our Parent Volunteer program plays an important role in our school community. Parents are invited to volunteer during school or after school events. The parent coordinator will support parents to become informed of DOE and school protocols and conduct parent surveys to support with needed parent workshops. Parent volunteers support with planning and organizing school events, collaborate with teachers to provide additional classroom support and contribute by bringing in resources to the school. Various community based organizations collaborate with the school to identify and bring needed resources. Parent Workshops are conducted during parent engagement Tuesdays, during Saturday Academy and evening events. Workshops on The Arts , Health and Wellness, the school curriculum will be provided to ensure that we collaborate with parents to meet the needs of the whole child. Teachers regularly collaborate with parents to share information on how to support the schools' mission. Monthly Parent Engagement Meetings focused on writing , Parent Engagement Tuesdays, ClassDojo, and Grade-wide monthly newsletters are created by teacher teams to give parents specific information about the learning expectations for their children's grade. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 11  The needs of English language learners are met using a pull out English as a New Language (ENL) services. Thirty-one (31) ENL students receive ENL instruction. Seven (7) of them also have individual Education Plans (IEPs). The needs of one hundred twenty-one (121) students with IEPs are being met in integrated co-teaching (ICT) classes, self contained classes and a pull/push-in Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) program. Academic intervention services (AIS) are provided to students recommended by their teachers. The crisis intervention team collaborates with classroom teachers to identify and support students with social emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Teacher collaboration is the Framework for Great Schools element that reflected the most progress as evidenced by teacher rounds, inter-visitations and teacher led professional development. The focus for the upcoming school year is in the area of supportive environment and strong family and community ties. Implementation of additional parent volunteer programs and workshops are planned. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q037 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 445 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 61 61 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 19 20 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 71.9% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.3% 9.2% 0.2% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.5 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 46 20 91.6% 2.0% 19.1% 86.5% 2.2% 1.8% 0 2% 7 26.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 NYS mathematics tests administered to students in grades 3-5 indicated that 27% of students met grade standards in Math compared to 22% in the previous school year. Highlights based on the June 2018 instructional report include the following: 82% of third graders were proficient in representing and solving problems involving multiplication and division 65% of fourth graders were proficient in drawing and identifying lines and angles, and classify shapes by properties of theri lines and angles. 80% of fifth graders were proficient in recognizing volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement Areas for improvement based on the June 2018 instructional report include: Representing a/b fractions on a number line diagram Apply and extend understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction by whole numbers. Making a line plot to display a data set Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will apply the SOLVE methodology in math problem solving resulting in a 5% percentage increase in the percentage of students scoring at or above proficiency levels as measured by common assessment rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Monthly learning walks in addition to a minimum of 4 observation cycles will be completed and will be used to identify professional development needs. PreK -5 Teachers Teacher Facilitators Oct. 2018 Principal to April 2019 Assistant Principal Ongoing Intervisitation Teacher Teams Oct. 2018 Grade Teacher Teams Principal Assistant Principal Curriculum Team SAT Team CARP Team Members Teacher teams Principal Assistant Principal SAT Team Curriculum Team Teacher Teams ● Administer a baseline math common assessment using SOLVE. Use data to identify student needs and implement differentiated instruction and provide AIS to students in all subgroups (ENL, SWD, and students performing below and above standards) The Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP) Instructional Team conducts data driven action research to plan common assessments, progress monitor to impact student learning ● Teacher teams will use ORID protocol to look at student work to identify grade-wide and school-wide trends to determine instruction, resources and intervention needs. They will adapt units and lessons based on identified trend to meet the needs of students with disabilities, ENL and students at risk. AIS using LLI, I-Ready and tiered instruction will be implemented. K-5 Weekly Teacher Teams Weekly during Monday Prof. learning Oct. 2018 to May 2019 ● Monthly Data meetings will be implemented to progress monitor. Teacher teams Once a month 2018-19 CEP 15  School Assessment Team Principal Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will organize monthly parent workshops facilitated by various staff members (parent coordinator, teacher teams, assistant principal, principal) and teacher teams will publish monthly newsletters informing parent about curricula. Workshop on the math practice standards and the SOLVE process will be conducted. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduled time to meet with teachers to discuss observation ● Professional Development Time ● The Danielson Framework Rubric ● Common Assessments ● School ELA curriculum ● Teacher Teams ● Funding for coverage ● SAT team members ● ReadyGen and additional ELA instructional resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  By February 2019, there will be a 4% increase in the percentage of students performing at or above proficiency level on common assessment using SOLVE as measured by rubrics Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Common assessment rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, there were 99 incidents reported, 11 teacher removals and 7 suspensions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of infractions as compared to the 2018-2019 as measured by OORS data. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PBIS Team will update BEST curriculum Monthly PBIS Student Assemblies will be used to award students meeting positive behavior goals K – 5 Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teacher Facilitators SAT member Assistant principal Principal PD Monthly Spirit Days Mid Year Celebrations Weekly extra gym prep Weekly shopping for PBIS C.H.A.M.P.S. Use Restorative Circle sessions for students with all students including students with disabilities, English Language Learners and students at risk Grade 3-5 Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teacher Facilitators SAT members Assistant principal Provide identified students with at risk guidance counseling services and targeted supports such as a buddy system, check in with specific support staff member. Grades K-5 Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal Guidance Counselor School Psychologist Implement PBIS schoolwide with a focus on Respect, effort, self-control and teamwork as the core values K-5 students Sept. 2018 PBIS Teacher teams to June 2019 SAT members Principal Parent workshop and Parent Mentoring All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 19  Teacher Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator will conduct monthly parent workshops and coordinate parent mentoring program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● OORS, ILog and anecdotal reports ● Funding for rewards ● Funding for coverage and resources to plan and organize ● Scheduled time for monthly PBIS assembly ● PBIS Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. There will a 5 % decrease in infractions as measured by OORS data by February 2019 compared to 2017-18 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Report monitoring Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 NYS mathematics tests administered to students in grades 3-5 indicated that 27% of students met grade standards in Math compared to 22% in the previous school year. Highlights based on the June 2018 instructional report include the following: 82% of third graders were proficient in representing and solving problems involving multiplication and division 65% of fourth graders were proficient in drawing and identifying lines and angles, and classify shapes by properties of theri lines and angles. 80% of fifth graders were proficient in recognizing volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement Areas for improvement on based on the June 2018 instructional report include: Representing a/b fractions on a number line diagram Apply and extend understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction by whole numbers. Making a line plot to display a data set Based on 2017-2018 End of Year reading Teacher's College Reading Writing Project (TCWRP) benchmarks, approximately 44% of students are meeting or exceeding grade level reading benchmarks. The 2017-2018 NYS English Language Arts (ELA) tests administered to students in grades 3-5 indicated that 27% of students met grade standards in ELA compared to 33% in the previous year. Highlights based on the June 2017 instructional report include the following: 59% of third graders were proficient in describing the relationship between events using language pertaining to time, and sequence. 67% of fourth graders were proficient in interpreting information presented visually, orally or quantitatively and explain how the information contributes to understanding text. 2018-19 CEP 21  53% of fifth graders were proficient in comparing and contrasting the overall structure of events, ideas, concepts, or information in two or more texts. Areas for improvement based on the June instructional report include: Determining the main idea of text; recount the key details and explain how they support the main idea. Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, and analyze how specific word choices shape meaning or tone. Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources to solve a problem efficiently. Based on classroom observations from 2017-2018, there is a need to focus on developing comprehensive assessment plans and planning instruction that uses student data to meet the needs of individual students. Areas of strength were in managing student behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaborate to analyze writing common assessments and identify gaps in order to adjust instructional strategies resulting in growth of at least 1 performance level for all students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners as measured by common assessment rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Schedule time for teacher team meetings to look at student work, assess grade wide student writing and review units of study K- 5 Teachers October Teacher teams 2018 to May 2019 Assistant Principal ● Professional Development: Strategies for increasing student engagement in learning by creating lessons with multiple entry points for all students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners. ● Implement walk-throughs and inter-visitations to provide frequent feedback from peers and supervisors Pre-K to 5 teachers ● Ongoing review of curriculum based on timely student data Pre-K to 5 Teachers Principal Weekly common preps and Monday Prof. learning. K-5 Teachers Nov. 2018 Teacher Facilitators Feb. 2019 Curriculum Team May 2019 Assistant Principal Principal Oct. 2018 Nov. 2018 Teachers rated effective/highly effective Dec. 2019 Assistant principal Jan. 2019 Principal Feb. 2019 March 2019 Monday Prof. Learning Oct. 2018 to May 2019 Teacher teams Assistant principal Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator will coordinate monthly workshops facilitated by teacher teams, principal and assistant principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funding for teacher coverage to conduct inter-visitation ● Grade Level and Vertical Teacher Teams ● The Danielson Framework Rubric ● Highly Effective Teachers ● Administrators ● Written observation reports ● Writing task ● Higher level thinking questions ● Go Math Performance Task and Unit Assessments ● NYC Performance Math Task Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will use 2 common assessments in math to monitor progress to reflect 50% of annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Common assessments and teacher created rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 NYS mathematics tests administered to students in grades 3-5 indicated that 27% of students met grade standards in Math compared to 22% in the previous school year. Highlights based on the June 2018 instructional report include the following: 82% of third graders were proficient in representing and solving problems involving multiplication and division 65% of fourth graders were proficient in drawing and identifying lines and angles, and classify shapes by properties of theri lines and angles. 80% of fifth graders were proficient in recognizing volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement Areas for improvement on based on the June 2018 instructional report include: Representing a/b fractions on a number line diagram Apply and extend understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction by whole numbers. Making a line plot to display a data set Based on 2017-2018 End of Year reading benchmarks, approximately 44% of students are meeting or exceeding grade level reading benchmarks. Based on 2017-2018 End of Year reading Teacher's College Reading Writing Project (TCWRP) benchmarks, approximately 44% of students are meeting or exceeding grade level reading benchmarks. The 2017-2018 NYS English Language Arts (ELA) tests administered to students in grades 3-5 indicated that 27% of students met grade standards in ELA compared to 33% in the previous year. Highlights based on the June 2017 instructional report include the following: 59% of third graders were proficient in describing the relationship between events using language pertaining to time, and sequence. 2018-19 CEP 25  67% of fourth graders were proficient in interpreting information presented visually, orally or quantitatively and explain how the information contributes to understanding text. 53% of fifth graders were proficient in comparing and contrasting the overall structure of events, ideas, concepts, or information in two or more texts. Areas for improvement based on the June instructional report include: Determining the main idea of text; recount the key details and explain how they support the main idea. Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, and analyze how specific word choices shape meaning or tone. Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources to solve a problem efficiently. Based on classroom observations from 2017-2018, there is a need to focus on developing comprehensive assessment plans and planning instruction that uses student data to meet the needs of individual students. Areas of strength were in managing student behavior. 74% of teachers responded to the 2017-2018 school year Learning Environment survey which is an increase in response rate from the previous school year. The area of celebration with highest positive teacher responses indicates that teachers value the rigor in math instruction and the area for growth is in effective leadership for instructional coherence and nurturing environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By April 2019, principal and assistant principal will complete 4 cycles of teacher evaluations resulting in a 10% increase in effective or highly effective ratings in component 3D by the end of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct monthly grade team data meetings to review grade wide student data and plan support. Pre-K to grade 5 Review observation reports monthly to identify and share progress in 3c and 3d components. First week of each month Principal Assistant principal teacher teams Implement formative walk-throughs to collect data focused on student engagement and assessment. Pre-K to grade 5 Oct. 2018 Principal Nov. 2018 Assistant principal Provide feedback based on walk-throughs and observation cycles, facilitate inter-visitations, facilitate new teacher meetings and implementing mentoring program. Pre-K to grade 5 Conduct survey to assess PL and to review PD plan to meet identified needs Pre-K to grade 5 Dec. 2018 Jan. 2019 Feb. 2019 March 2019 Oct. 2018 to April 2019 Teacher facilitators Lab site classrooms Principal Assistant principal Oct. 2018 PD Committee Jan. 2019 Principal Assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  Conduct monthly parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Curriculum Team ● Classroom Lab Sites Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a review of Advance will reflect that 50% of observations are completed Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 57% of parents responded to the 2017-2018 school year Learning Environment survey which is similar to the previous school year's response rate. The areas of celebration with highest positive parent responses indicate that parents feel respected by the school and are satisfied with the support their children receive especially in pre-kindergarten. The grow area is in providing more extra-curricular activities and opportunity for parents to volunteer. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2020, 75 % of parents will respond to Learning environment survey. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Paint Night ● Weekly voicemail reminders with flyers. Pre-K to Grade 5 Pre-K to Grade 5 March SLT \ PTA March\April Parent coordinator Raffle for classes with 100% response rate for LES. Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Teams Pre-K to Grade 5 Pre-K to Grade 5 February Teacher Teams February PTA Parents Pre-K to Grade 5 March PTA ● Black History Month Speak Out Assembly -Sweetheart Dance Family Laser Light Show Night Science Spectacular 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York Junior Tennis League (ACES) , Sanford Harmony , parent volunteers, PTA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mission/Vision Statement Calendar Newsletters Citywide Instructional Expectations 2018-19 CEP 30  School Curricula and Resources School Website Funding for incentives and giveaways Instructional Materials Scheduled Time for Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, review attendance at parent workshops and PA meetings to reflect an increase of 20% in parents attending school events. Meet with parent coordinator Monthly to review parent attendance at workshops to identify outreach strategies especially for parents of students at risk. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data from workshops and meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are not meeting grade wide state standards. Mathematics Students who are not meeting grade wide state standards. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) guided reading strategies Daily small group and one to one. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) In small groups during the school day and after school Orton Guillingham LLI Pull Out and push in program We are incorporating Response to Intervention (RTI) strategies in the regular classroom to meet students’ needs in literacy Extended Day Saturday Programs In small groups during the school day and after school Problem SolvingStrategies KWHL SOLVE Visualization Splash Math pull out and push in programs After school and Saturday Programs Daily small group and one to one. Teachers are using Response to Intervention strategies in Mathematics to incorporate in their Tier I intervention in the classroom. Teachers are using flexible grouping to address students’ needs. They are also using their data from Math common assessments to address the needs of 2018-19 CEP 32  Science Students who are not meeting grade wide state standards. Small group instruction KWHL Guided inquiry strategies entry and exit slips Social Studies Students who are not meeting grade wide state standards. small group instruction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with documented referrals indicating need for support the learners in their class. Teachers are working with students to provide Tier II small group intervention to remediate and support student understanding of science concepts. Daily small group and one to one instruction. Teachers are working with students to provide Tier II small group intervention to remediate and support student understanding of science concepts. Daily small group and one to one instruction. Method of Delivery: Small Group & one to one extended day programs baseline assessment entry exit slip Reference and process charts Sanford TCIS Restorative circles individual sessions Use of Games, Play Therapy PBIS Role play In small groups during the school day and extended day programs. In small groups during the school day and extended day programs Guidance: During the school days on Monday, Wednesday and Thursday. School Psychologist: During the school days on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday. School Social Worker: During the School Day on Wednesday through Friday. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 54 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide uniforms and school supplies, pay for school expenses, academic intervention, counseling session Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All our staff members are highly qualified and are properly certified to teach in their appointed positions. When recruiting teachers for vacancy positions, we only select teachers with certifications to match our vacancies. When a teacher already in the building needs to change their position, we make sure that the teacher takes appropriate coursework to meet the requirements for their new area of certification. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development for teachers, principals and paraprofessionals is ongoing, and is based on the needs of staff members. Professional development sessions are chosen and designed according to self-identified needs and observed needs as measured by Danielson observations conducted by school leaders. The professional development team which includes upper grade teachers, lower grade teachers, a paraprofessional, data specialist, ESL teacher, SLT members and school administrators look at our school data including Danielson Framework, the Framework for Great Schools, last Quality Review and PPO, Learning Environment Survey and our previous CEP goals to gather and triangulate the data to assess the areas in which we need to enhance and develop our current practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Common Core State Standards workshops are provided to Pre-K parents by the administrators and our Pre-K family worker. In addition Pre-K parents are invited to all parent workshops hosted for families from Pre-K to Grade 5. Parent workshops may include topics about: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy and mathematics. Our Pre-K students attend full school day sessions Monday-Friday from 8:00am-2:20pm. Teachers use a thematic approach to providing students with daily reading, science, social studies, mathematics, writing, art and physical education. Splash into Pre-K is a supplemental instructional program used to support the teacher’s thematic units. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) team and administrators met to discuss all the DOE and curriculum based assessment options that were available to us as a school. We selected the assessments that were appropriately aligned to our curricula for ReadyGen and Go Math as well as grade level rubric based performance tasks in order to match CCLS standards. After students take these baseline assessments we use the data to help us make adjustments to our instructional program. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 37  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 243,687.00 44,140.00 11,200.00 0 2,744,943.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 38  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 37 The Cynthia Jenkins School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS37Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS37Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP 42  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Cynthia Jenkins School Borough Queens School Number 037 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pascale Benjamin Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher K. Gahn Teacher/Subject Area Destio/2nd Teacher/Subject Area Mir/5th Related-Service Provider Hinds/IEP Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal l. Jacobs Coach School Counselor C. Jones Parent Sarah Howard Parent Coordinator Mrs. Samuels Field Support Center Staff Member Galvez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 469 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.62%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school, PS 37Q, has chosen TCRWP Running Records as part of the formative assessment plan for ELA. The TCRWP offers a set of informal reading inventories for narrative texts which correlates to the Fountas and Pinnell system for leveling books. These assessments help teachers identify which level of texts students can read independently and will therefore be able to practice. The assessments provide an analysis of comprehension, miscues, and, fluency (fluency is only assessed for Levels J-Z). The data from the TCRWP provides insights about many skills ELLs have in reading in English. Children come with different understanding about the conventions that we use to communicate meaning in print. Assessing the child's level of understanding, and sometimes misunderstandings of these conventions, helps teachers know what their students are attending to in print and what still needs to be learned. This applies to ELLs as well. It provides information on which letters the ELLs can identify. Knowing the names of the letters helps them communicate with the teacher and each other. Being able to discriminate and quickly recognize important letters is also helpful in attaching the correct sound to the letters when reading words. 2018-19 CEP 48  The TCRWP also assesses high frequency words. The purpose is to determine the number of high-frequency words that students know or can automatically recognize. When these words are instantly recognized, the student can more easily focus on comprehension of what is going on in the story. Data from the running records impact the school's instructional plan regarding ELLs. Careful scaffolding of literacy experiences (in English) enhance ELL students' learning of oral and written English. Teachers must support ELLs in phonics with lessons that include learning key aspects of phonological awareness, letter knowledge, letter-sound relationships, letter formation, word structure, spelling patterns, and high frequency words. Providing adequate hands-on activities are essential for ELLs. Things such as allowing them opportunity to manipulate magnetic letters and/or work with high frequency word and letter cards with pictures, sorting and categorizing are just examples. Letter and high frequency word cards, with pictures, will help ELLs form a strong core vocabulary of English words which is critical for reading, writing, and oral language development. When working with ELLs, teachers need to employ more body language and gestures as well enunciate words clearly. PS 37, we also use the ELA and Math Performance Assessments as the MOSL baseline assessments. The ENL and classroom teachers are part of curriculum planning both vertically and horizontally throughtout the year. Individual learning needs are discussed on a bi-weekly basis. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In collaboration with grade and classroom teachers the ENL teacher provides alternate assessment setting to provide a comfortable testing environment for the ELL population in the school. Teachers and ENL teachers will use the ORID model to collaboration using student work to plan and focus on next steps for each ELL student. Teacher and ENL will use common planning time as well as Monday professional development time to effectively communicate the needs of the student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In terms of evaluating success for ELLs P.S. 37 uses the NYC Performance Assessment MOSL baseline, unit assessments, formative assessments such as TCRWP to measure growth multiple times in a school year. The ENL teachers maintians a entry portfolio that includes writing task 3 times a year. AYP data is used to ensure that ELLs are making adequate progress and to target pd as well as intervention services. This year P.S. 37 will add the Fall and Spring Baseline Assessment to Baseline and Benchmark assessment. This will also aid as a tool for future planning of Curriculum to ENL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is received the ENL teacher will shares their finding with her classroom teacher and parents. As a part of the SAT/PPT/ team the ENL teacher will also share results and findings with the team. If there are students who needs additional supports AIS instruction, smaller grouping in classroom activities etc. will be discussed and decided upon for that student. The student will receive appropriate services. The team will discuss findings on a weekly basis with the ENL teacher and then reconvene in 6-8 weeks and discuss progress to decide if more or different interventions services need to take place. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to make academic referral to the school's School Assesssment Team (SAT) to ensure that the needs of ELL students are met. The ENL teacher plans to be trained in the Orton Gillingham approach as recommended by the DELLS department as proper intervention for ELLs for RTI. ELL within the RtI framework will have intensive tailored instruction using a strong instructional core. All of the needs will be met by the teacher and student working together by developing language and literacy across the curriculum, making lessons meaningful by linking background knowledge to the content, teaching complex thinking by targeting academically rigorous and challenging instructional goals while offering supports the students need to succeed and finally teaching through conversation that consists of dialogue, questioning, sharing ideas and knowledge. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 49  Analysis the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL tests in the four modalities (Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing) across proficiency levels and grades is varied. Most students scored higher in the speaking and listening than in the reading and writing part of the test, writing being the lowest modality. Using the NYSESLAT data P.S.37 has shown growth specifically showing gain in reading and writing among our SWD/ELL population. 5 of the 7 students performed at a higher level from the previous year NYSESLAT testing. The other 2 did not move up a performance level but improved in reading and writing but stayed the same in listening in speaking 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The NYSESLAT is one piece of the findings used to improve instruction. The ENL teacher is part of the Curriculum team to ensure instruction is tailored to ENL needs. The ENL teacher has gone to NYC DOE DELLS training which targets the SWD/ELL population and writing more effective IEPS for these students. She has worked with her peers to see gains in the this targeted population. The ENL teacher has also taken part in NYSED training to develop curriculum for SIFE students. By gaining knowledge from these sources the ENL has adjusted her curriculum and helped classroom teacher tailor their teaching to see more effective results from their ELL students. ENL teacher works with teacher teams and uses the ORID protocol to assess student work. The ENL teacher discusses future steps for this child and works with specific feedback from grade teacher to plan for further instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Push-in and pull-out services are provided based on need and the number of students on each grade. Some groups are multigrades as per CR 154.2 to include 2 consecutive grades. Grouping is based on intellectual abilities as well as compliance with grades. Push-in works with ELLs in collaboration with the general education classroom teacher to provide support in the classroom. There is time to prepare with the classroom teacher during Professional Development as well as common planning times. Pull-out modelis for students who based on NYSESLAT scores will receive English acquisition focused instruction. Teacher and ENL teacher will still collaborate with curriculum to ensure continuity of instructions and needs of the child. Again the ORID model will be used for teachers to examine student work which is the school-wide protocol. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? A dually certified ENL teacher we will delivering a free-standing ENL class which will focuses on ELA in the content areas of Social Studies and Science. Entering and emerging students will receive 360 minutes by getting double ENL periods a 2018-19 CEP 50  day. Transitioning and expanding students will receive 180 minutes per week by getting a single period 4 times a week. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes by getting 2 periods per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. By using the National Geographic Reach program we will fostering language development using specific content in Social Studies and Science in our free-standing ENL classes. The ENL teacher will also push in during ELA to deliver instruction. Newcomers- All students who have spent less than 3 years in the NYCDOE schools despite NYSESLAT scores are considered newcomers. These students are supported through different uses of linguistic strategies. The ENL teacher as well as the classroom teacher use a variety of strategies to enhance each students' listening, speaking, reading and writing skills which include pictures, vocabulary building, translation support, modeling, using prior knowledge front he students own culture. Developing- The students who are enrolled 4-6 year will continue to receive ENL instruction but will consult with School Leadership Team to discuss other supports that can be used to have the student succeed, 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Translation services are offered when needed. Parent volunteers are utilized for entering and emerging students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation is an expectations of each lesson. The use of rephrasing, picture cards, picture dictionaries, books on tape, instructional videos is used to support SIFE and Newcomer based on identified needs. The use of excerpts from class texts, direct vocabulary instruction, building background knowledge connecting topics to students personal experiences and developing questioning techniques and use of appropriate graphic organizer is used to support Developing and Long term ELL students. ENL instruction is based on the individual learning needs. Grouping the students in an appropriate pairing or for 1:1 assistance with a teacher or classmate is ongoing. Working with diverse partners and engaging students in rigorous activities is the goal of differentiation. ELLs are also provided testing accommodation such as extended time, translation of test other than ELA and other locations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Using small group setting and the use of content rich instruction has helped facilitate academic growth with ELL-SWD. Using the National Geographic Reach program focusing on Social Studies and Science themes has helped students accelerate in their language development both in and out of the classroom setting. Using a variety of resources Smart Board, picture cards, primary source materials , textbook, workbook, projects and artifacts have helped to bring the content alive when learning about topics such as weather, different regions of the world. Students' unique backgrounds are used to help them acquire new knowledge and to help engage them in discussions about content. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Small group settings,individualized goals, teacher team meetings, content-rich instruction all contribute to help ELL-SWD attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Pushing in allows the ENL teacher to support classroom teachers to scaffold instruction and enable ELL-SWD to achieve the IEP goals. ELLS-SWDs are placed in ICT classes based on IEP recommendations that are determined by the School Assessment Team which includes classroom teachers, SBST and ENL input. 2018-19 CEP 51  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Classroom teachers are supported by the ENL teacher to provide tier 2 intervention to ELL students in ELA and Math. Tier 3 intervention is provided by the ENL teacher. Additional support (SETSS, Speech ) is provided when needed on an at risk basis. Students are provided glossaries, visuals and selected online programs to develop vocabulary and language. The ENL teacher use non fiction to provide instruction in Science and Social Studies. The ENL teacher has taken part in Professional Learning to Enhance Instruction in the Classroom, specifically ELL Leadership Institute provided by BFSC the DELLS 2 day institute for Elementary ELL Literacy Instruction and UFT Conference for ELL Rising. These supports have helped enhance instruction to not only the ELL population but other targeted subgroups. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Smaller groups and the option to push in will improve the ENL program. The ENL teacher will collaborate with teacher teams during Monday PD and common preps to align instruction to identified standards. The ENL teacher plans on being part of the training of Orton Gillingham as recommended by DELLS for RTI intervention for ELLS. The ENL teacher plans on taking part in NYSTESOL conference, UFT Fall Conference and all recommend by FSC as well as other DELLS and SWDELL Institutes. . 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None as our population will need additional support based on the trends in reading comprehension and writing. We are seeking to expand services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are provided with invite to all school programs such as ACES, Cookshop, basketball, Girls on the Run, CASA, plays, Saturday Afterschool Program and Inside Broadway. The ENL teacher identifies students needs based on her interaction with ELLs and parent coordinator conduct outreach to get parents involved. For example some of our ELLs were participants in Girls On the Run and many of our ELLs attend the afterschool program. P.S. 37 will use the boarding system to ensure new ELLs student success so they can gain access to new positions, clubs and groups in the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Smart boards as well as individual computers are used in classroom instructions. National Geographic Reach is our choice textbook with materials ranging from pictures, songs, textbooks and group projects that focus on all content areas. Newcomers- pictures, modeling, written instructions, questioning supports, language buddies, translated glossary support, and direct vocabulary instructions, sentence starters, teacher conferencing with specific feedback to their individual needs Developing ELLs- pictures, modeling, written instructions, questioning supports, language buddies, translated glossary support, and direct vocabulary instructions. specific graphic organizer based on their needs,repeated or clarified instructions, teacher conferencing with specific feedback to their individuals needs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The responses of the home language survey are analyzed to identify trends in the language needs of the school. That information is discussed at team meetings and shared with the SLT as well as the parent coordinator to ensure that the school plans for changing needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. By complying with CR-154 and reviewing age and grade levels students are placed in groups that are just one grade above or below based on academic needs and capabilities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 52  Smart boards as well as individual computers are used in classroom instructions. National Geographic Reach is our choice textbook with materials ranging from pictures, textbooks and group projects that focus on all content areas. The ENL teacher takes part in many professional develo-pment from a variety of sources namely NYCDOE DELLS, BFSC, Teacher College, NYSTESOL, and UFT. The ENL teacher then uses this information to enhance the ELL instruction in the classrooms of her peers as well as struggling students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELL are carefully placed in a class with other ELLs to allow the ENL teacher to support. Peer helpers are used as well. Notification to school aides of any language barrriers is communicated via ENL teacher and appropriate translation for key words are communicated to school aides and classroom teacher as well as making them aware fo translation services provided by the DOE. ENL teacher ensures all parents entitlement, HLIS and parent orientation are given in home language. Translation Serrvices can also be done over the phone. Distribution of glossary and dictionary by the ENL teacher to the student for regular classroom lessons also takes place. The ENL teacher is the Language Access Coordinator so communication to the staff about translation services is given to each staff member. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teacher takes part in state conferences as well as high-education conferences at the college and state level. ENL teacher meets with grade teachers during grade meetings to plan for scaffolding instructions for ELLs. ENL teachers presents to staff ways to accommodate and differentiate with ELLs typically 2-3 times a year focusing on questioning strategies as well as support for each ELL level. ENL teacher is always available for meeting before and after-school to provide assistance. ENL turn-keys information that is learned at conferences from FSC, DELLS, Teacher College, and UFT. The ENL teacher will attend several workshops offered by the FSC throughout the year. The principal and assistant principal provide feedback that is specific to each student population. ENL teacher is on hand to work with all staff on Monday and Tuesday professional development 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Monday PD time is allocated to have ELL specific professional development. The ENL Teacher takes part in NYCDOE Professional Development, NYSED training, DELLS and UFT training to ensure the necessary amount of hours are ELL 2018-19 CEP 53  specific. The ENL teacher communicates when these professional development opportunities are available to ensure pedagogues have appropriate hours needed for certification. Agendas and attendance are taken for these then submission to the NYSED. The ENL teacher emails staff on opportunities that are available through Teacher College, UFT, NYCDOE and other CTLE sources to obtain the 15%ELL specific professional development for all teachers as per CR 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Several opportunities are available throughout the year for Parent-teacher Conference report card nights , meeting before and after-school with the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher is also available after Title III ENL meets on Saturdays mornings ensuring that every parent has access to the ENL teacher at a variety of times and hours. Each parents is accommodated to meet in a timely manner about their child. Tuesdays afternoons are also allocated to Parent Involvement. Translations services are provided by the DOE Translations Services as well as staff on hand at the school. Goals and needs are discussed with the parent as well as how the child can improve and what the school is doing as well as what can be done at home to ensure success. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are welcomed to speak with the ENL on a weekly basis, communication is available whether in written or on the phone are always welcome. The parent coordinator encourages parents to volunteer as translators during workshops. The parents have access to the ENL teacher they are aware of the schedule of Scheduled time, Tuesdays after-school but are more than welcome to visit with the ENL teacher if they have a concern. Parents are encouraged to be part of class trips, tutoring, translations, and other school functions. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: The ENL teacher has become a member of many parts of the schools planning teams. To ensure the needs of all ELLS are met she has become the Respect for All liason, started using Restorative Circles, been designated the Language Access coordinator, member of the SAT and Safety Committee by being part of these committees she is ensuring the vision that "All teachers are teachers of ELLs" as stated in the Framework for Great Schools. P.S. 37 stands with their ELL population to improve access and equity of all in their school community. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pascale Benjamin-Pereira, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Cynthia Jenkins School School DBN: 29Q037 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) P. Benjamin Pascale Title Principal L. Jacobs Assistant Principal Chantal Samuel Parent Coordinator K. Gahn ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Howard Parent R. Mir/5th J. DeStio2 C. Jones Beverly Mitchell S. Hinds Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other IEP Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 1/1/16 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29q037 School Name: The Cynthia Jenkins School Superintendent: B. Mitchell The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kim Ghan ENL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The pupil access secretary notifies the ENL teacher of new students being registered. The family is interviewed by a member of the on-boarding team and assistance in given in language other than English if needed to complete HLIS and other forms. A member of the on-boarding team collaborates with pupil account secretary to provide families of new students with information and supports new students to adapt to their new school class. Information from blue card is used to identify language other than English needs. Forms can be filled out in home language when needed using translation from the intranet. Use of ATS code RAPL school level adult preferred language report. UPPG and/or PARU are also used to update parent preferred languages. Parent coordinator uses a school survey to identify parent translators. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Haitian Creole Spanish Arabic French Bengali 465 6 9 3 2 1 95.48 1.23 1.85 0.62 0.41 0.21 464 7 9 2 3 1 95.28 1.44 1.85 0.41 0.62 0.21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Haitian Creole, Spanish, Arabic, French and Bengali Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Parent Handbook June and upon registration Monthly newsletters and calendars Beginning of each month plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE translation services DOE translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 58  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Parent Engagement One Tuesday per month PTC Sept. 13 Nov.15-16 March 14-15 May 23 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Use selected staff members and DOE translators Use selected staff members and DOE translators 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Voice messenger/text service provides translations Selected staff members will be used when needed for needed translation Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be informed during beginning of school year meeting Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signs will be posted in main entrance and main office 2018-19 CEP 59  Parent coordinator will conduct outreach based on information from blue card Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? LAC will survey parents 2018-19 CEP 60 
