2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q042 School Name: P.S./M.S 042 R. VERNAM Principal: PATRICIA FINN 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert Vernam 342700010042 Pre-K to 8 School Number (DBN): 27Q042 488 Beach 66 th Street Arverne, NY 11692 718-634-7914 718-474-7591 Phone Number: Patricia Finn Fax: Email Address: PFinn3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Family Health International / FHI360 Patricia Finn Felix Omozusi JacobAngelou Sherie Monroe Diane Hewitt SherieMonroe NA NA District Information Geographical District: 27 Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard Ozone Park, NY 11416 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard. Ozone Park, NY MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Patricia Finn JacobAngelou Sherie Monroe Linda Cobia SherieMonroe Felix Omozusi Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Theresa Opitz Diane Hewitt Rhonda Williams Tiffany Fayall Vacancy LillianGalloway Jacob Angelou Sheri Antony Vacancy x X X X X X X X X UFT UFT Parent Parent Parent UFT UFT UFT Parent Member/ Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The mission of P.S./M.S. 42 is to increase academic excellence for all children by providing programs that will nurture and support their strengths and social emotional needs. Our goal is to meet the expectations of the New York Common Core Learning Standards for Education and create a learning environment that will promote all of our students to grade level and above. Our purpose is to build and improve morale and connection to school by instilling in our students, staff and parents a sense of respect for others and ourselves, as well as an appreciation for the diversity of the multicultural society in which we live, work, and learn. At PS/MS 42, we believe that student performance will increase through thoughtfully planned, student centered and culturally responsive learning tasks that are differentiated for students’ learning styles, preferences, interests, and abilities. A strategic implementation of rigorous curricula that supports differentiated instruction and allows for student choice will result in increased student engagement and commitment to learning. Furthermore, an increased and purposeful use of data will help us to identify students in need of more targeted supports and ensure that these students receive the supports and interventions they need. Our Community Partnership with Family Health International (FHI 360) began four years ago with an extensive needs assessment, data analysis, and community outreach. Because of the geographic isolation of the Rockaway Peninsula, these assessments identified a targeted need to increase family and community engagement and strengthen students' social emotional well-being. Highlights from our collaboration, thus far, include: three community-wide fall celebrations; spring Community Forums; end-of year community school field day; a school-wide focus on social emotional learning and positive youth development; academic supports in the form of instructional coaching and special education supports; the creation of a wellness center and a school based mental health clinic; the planning and implementation of a robust and differentiated ELT offerings; targeted attention to addressing our attendance challenges; stronger integration between the school and after-school/summer programs; and, increased focus on family engagement. As a Community School we have the benefit of having a full time Community School Director, a mental health clinic, resource coordination, and the backing of a collaborative CBO supervisor. FHI 360 has introduced models and strategies to help strengthen social emotional learning in all classrooms and school environments. This has included a focus on what schools and families can do to build students' developmental assets, and ways students can develop strong character traits through the use of the Emotionally Responsive Teddy Bear Program from Bank Street, Social Emotional Learning/Ruler from Yale and Character Counts, a character education program. FHI 360 has also supported us in the implementation of tier one supports (such as STEAM programs and enrichment electives), tier two targeted interventions (such as clubs/activities, group counseling, attendance check-ins, etc.), and tier three intensive interventions (such as one-on-one counseling, tutoring, attendance supports, etc.). This partnership continues to provide increased opportunities for school and family involvement, student achievement, and community building. As a result of our on-site support from two literacy consultants to help implement the Independent Reading component of the Renewal School initiative, our classroom Lab Sites have evidenced what robust, independent reading in the classroom looks like. Teachers conducted inter-visitations and fishbowl Professional Development sessions on leveling classroom libraries, conferencing, and building stamina. Growth was demonstrated and our students' independent reading levels continue to increase. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  Our school is a member of the Chancellor's Middle School Arts Matters program. Similar to last year, our students in grades 5-8 were provided access to two different disciplines within the arts: visual arts and music. We believe that all children should partake in Arts enrichment courses that connect real world experiences. These initiatives support our belief that children learn through different modalities. Students in grades K through 8 showcased their learning in a performance and display of artwork that they created through the year in Winter and Spring Art Shows. We look forward to continuing to expand our school's Arts Enrichment courses this year through the Chancellor's Arts Matters Program. This upcoming year will be our fourth working with Broadway Jr. theatre company. This opportunity allows our students to develop an appreciation for the Arts while building new relationships which promotes a culture of respect for individuals' differences. The school's special student populations include English Language Learners (ENLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Our ENL population represents approximately 6% of our student population and our SWD population represents over 28% of our student population, with both continuing to increase, contributing to the diversity of our school. The needs of both the ENL and the SWD population are met through small group instruction, differentiated instruction, as well as Academic Intervention Services (AIS). Student interest and learning style surveys are also utilized to incorporate students' individual needs. In the coming school year, we plan to increase these differentiated supports through our ELT program, which will be programmed to address specific student needs and interests. The overarching goal in the Renewal School process is to improve student achievement in both ELA and Math evidenced by a significant increase of students performing at levels 3 and 4 on the state assessments. Overall, it is expected that there will be a significant decrease in student performance at level 1 with an increase in students performing at level 2, 3, or 4. Each of the annual goals, aligned to the Framework for Great Schools, are guiding components that will impact the attainment of the overarching goal to improve student achievement in ELA and Math at levels 3 and 4. This year through Community School partnership with FHI 360, we will be continuing to support two part time Literacy Coaches to work with our teachers, one in grades 3-5 and the other in grades 6-8. While at the time of this writing we have not yet received the official state test results, an analysis of the RASP Summary shows we have made progress toward this benchmark. The element of the Framework for Great Schools that our school has made the most progress in is Collaborative Teachers. In our May 2018 Quality Review, our area of celebration was Collaborative Teachers with a rating of Proficient. Much of this was due to the work of our Instructional Leadership Team, which is made up of three administrators, a Peer Collaborative teacher, three model teachers, the Literacy Coaches, data specialist, Parent Coordinator, Librarian and CBO director. In the 2017-18 school year, we worked with Teacher Teams on unit planning, adapting curriculum, and developing formative assessments, while also analyzing student outcomes and designing targeted Professional Development for our teachers that focused on identified needs. Teachers also have collaboratively planned and led Monday Professional Development sessions for their colleagues. We continue to deepen and expand this work this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools that our school still faces challenges with is Rigorous Instruction. We are designing an integrated approach to our staff PD that will address the issue of rigorous instruction and allow teacher teams to plan together and review student work from common assessments to identify the level of mastery and rigor. Our coaches will support this work and will help ensure that everyone has a shared vision of what grade level rigor looks like. In addition, the instructional leadership team will establish the conditions for a laser focus on developing students’ academic vocabulary and reading comprehension strategies, with the goal of increasing their reading, speaking and writing skills. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q042 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 658 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 109 110 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 24 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.6% % Reduced Lunch 3.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 22.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 73 73 10 10 87.4% 2.4% 26.1% 72.6% 1.4% 2.0% 4 12% 5.6 13.8% 5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on the 2017-2018 running records data, 95% were able to move 1 reading level or higher by the end of the school year. The RASP data also showed that more students are meeting ELA benchmarks than in previous years. However, trend data show that as students move up in grades, where reading performance is based more on comprehension than decoding, increases in reading levels are not occurring at the same pace. This observation is supported by the results shown in the 2017-2018 June Instructional Report. After analyzing this and other current data, we were able to conclude that reading comprehension is a critical factor as to why many of our students were unable to advance 2 or more reading levels. The data indicate that our priority need is to build students' reading comprehension, so that they can understand complex text, sustain academic discourse, and reference evidence, all of which will deepen and expand their literacy skills. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our vision for rigorous instruction includes a shared expectation that 80% of students will show demonstrable growth in ELA and Math by the conclusion of this year. In ELA, this vision centers around a laser focus on developing students’ academic vocabulary and reading comprehension strategies in order for students to increase their reading, speaking and writing skills. In math, this vision focuses on providing students with daily opportunities for productive struggle, which evolves the "I do, We do, You do" model to a "You do, We do, I do" approach. This allows for hands-on 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  exploration and meaning making. Using a triangulation of data that consists of assessment data, learning styles survey data and daily observational data, teachers will ensure lessons are designed to include the learning style of every child and provide opportunities for multiple entry points to ensure student progress and success. To realize this vision, we are dedicated to the provision of an engaging learning environment for our students that incorporates the following. In grades kindergarten through five, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Units of Study and Go Math will continue to be implemented. For our Middle School, Balanced literacy, TC Writing Units of Study, and Go Math will be used. We are also very excited that we will continue to be a part of the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) for the 2018-2019 school year. This will support a strong focus on vocabulary throughout content areas with the implementation of Word Generation. Strategic and intensive reading support to our below level readers, as well as enrichment models such as Socratic Seminar to support our students who are at or above proficiency level, are also an integral component of MSQI. All grades use Engage NY to supplement curricula and meet the instructional shifts of the Common Core. Additionally, MyOn, i-Ready and Mathletics will be used as both ongoing diagnostic tools and differentiated independent reading for all students. In 2018-2019, we will change our approach to ELT to ensure that we are programming for the student rather than the class. This will help us to better meet the needs of all students, including our ELL and SWD population, by targeting content and instructional strategies for specific learner needs. Students will be grouped into ELT practices based on targeted need and interest. This will be delivered through targeted small group instruction, including Academic Intervention Services (AIS), that is focused on remediation and enrichment for common learning challenges. Our ELT will include ELA and math targeted instruction, literacy and STEM enrichment, and social and emotional learning opportunities. Common Core aligned Interim Assessments will be administered on a cyclical basis as well as curriculum-based benchmark exams. Data will be analyzed using the DataWise protocol in weekly Grade Teacher Teams and through various Professional Development Data sessions. FHI 360, our CBO, will help us to track, research, collect, organize, and analyze student data using a variety of data systems (including the New Visions Student Portal and a school-based online Assessment Tracker). Data will be analyzed by all school leaders, teacher leaders (Peer Collaborative Teacher and three Model Teachers), and teachers on a consistent basis. Such analyzing of data and dialogue will take place during weekly teacher team meetings, professional development and Inquiry Focus Team meetings. Curriculum Action planning and revisions with regards to data review will be a collaborative effort between teachers, Model Teachers, and Administration to ensure success. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision is to provide students with rigorous standards based instruction with scaffolded supports that is differentiated to meet the individual learning styles of our students. During classroom instruction supports will be differentiated to ensure all students are working at grade level. During ELT, and through other targeted supports (such as AIS and mentoring), students who are below grade level will receive direct instruction at their current level to help them build critical skills and learn the essential strategies that will help them make significant progress toward grade level. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? We have a vision that every one of our students will have the knowledge, skills, mindsets, and habits to be college and career ready. This means that students will learn how to learn. They will be self-aware of their own strengths and challenges, and they will learn how to advocate for their own needs. They will also develop critical skills in reading and analyzing both fiction and non-fiction texts, and being able to support their opinions and analysis with evidence. They 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  will become comfortable with increasingly more complex text, and they will develop and apply academic vocabulary to show their comprehension of the content as well as their facility with the language of the discipline. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Teachers will model what it means to monitor our own comprehension as we read, and what it looks like to speak using appropriate academic vocabulary. The workshop model will be the primary means of instruction, where teachers introduce a new concept, strategy, or skill and students are given guided instruction to practice applying these strategies. With a gradual release of responsibility approach, students begin taking ownership of the learning, and work more independently once they have acquired the necessary foundation. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will provide differentiated and nurturing multiple entry points for students of varying levels to develop these skills and practices, varying the reading levels of texts when students are learning new strategies to ensure that students are able to develop effective techniques with accessible texts. Once students have mastered the strategies teachers will increase text complexity so that students are reading increasingly difficult texts at grade level. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? At the beginning of the year we will work collaboratively with Data Corp to administer the Go Math assessment for K-8, the first administration of F&P (it will be done four times throughout the year), and we will administer the Dolch and the Fry assessments to determine students' site word recognition. We will also administer Fundations Assessments for K-2, and we will have Mental Math, as well as TC On-Demand Writing assessments in information, narrative, and argumentative writing. For Middle school we will also use Word Generation assessments and the DRP ( Updated February 2019) to support our focus on academic vocabulary (at the beginning, middle, and end of the year). All of this data will be tracked in an accessible school-wide Drop box folder so that all teachers and administrators have access to key student data so they can design instruction and targeted students support to address individual student needs. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Formative Benchmark Go Math/Mental Math TCRWP Running Records K-5 DRP 6-8 (Updated February 2019) Dolch/Fry/Word Gen Benchmark TC Writing Formative Part 3 – Annual Goal K-8 K-8 K-8 3-8 Math assessments Reading levels Site words and academic vocabulary Writing assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Through a focus on academic discourse across all content areas, 90% of our students will evidence an increase in reading comprehension as measured by TCWRP(K-5) running records and DRP(6-8) by June, 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? i-Ready Diagnostic Reading Fountas and Pinnell MyOn Usuage Student Attendance Word Generation Assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) MyOn ,classroom observations, formative and summative assessments i-Ready Diagnostic Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. All students will be targeted for individualized reading supports TCWRP Fountas and Pinnell Running Records (1: 9/18-10-18) (2: 1/19-2/19) (3: 5/19) School Administration, staff, instructional coach, Community School Director and CBO team i-Ready Diagnostic Running Records: All K-5 students will be assessed with the TCRWP running records, 4 times during the school year, to continuously monitor the progress of student's instructional and independent reading level. Writing Workshop: In grades K-8, teachers will follow the TC Writer’s Workshop model, to support student writing. This includes a common pacing calendar for each grade level. Student writing will be documented in the students’ writer's notebook, writing Writing Workshop: All teachers, including clusters, will implement reading comprehension strategies (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) Literacy instruction (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) Independent Reading (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) Professional Development (Mondays from 3:00-4:20 from 9/18 - 6/19) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  Off-site PD (Dates TBD) folders, and student's writing portfolios. Literacy Instruction: Teachers will continue to use researched based curriculum including Fundations (K-2) TC Reading Units of Study (Grades K-5), Balanced Literacy (Middle School) and TC Writing (K-8,). Word Generation and MSQI (Middle School) Curriculum will be supplemented with lesson plans, course materials, standards pacing guides, and student resources through Engageny, i-Ready, Ready NY and MyOn. Independent Reading: To support students’ independent reading, classes will have resources such as classroom libraries, iReady, and MyOn. Independent Reading will be incorporated into the Flow of the Day and Extended Learning Time (ELT). Students will document their Independent Reading through Reading Logs used at home and in school. Stamina charts will document students' progress as a class. Students will have book baggies based on their individual reading levels and interests. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Designated teachers will attend off site professional development for TC Writer’s Work Professional Development:shop and turnkey the learning to their colleagues. All teachers will receive on-site training and support in the implementation of i-Ready, Fundations and MyOn. Word Generation Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, ENL, and other high-need student subgroups Differentiation: Teachers will continue to utilize learning styles and interest surveys to differentiate curriculum, content, and strategies. Small reading group activities and lessons will be utilized to push students reading levels. These groups will work on reading strategies around their instructional and frustration levels. More opportunities for Least Restricted Environment (LRE) will be provided for students with Special Needs in all subject areas. Imagine Learning, MyOn, iReady, formative and summative assessments All students, special population students Teachers College Writing Reading Project (TCWRP) Differentiation (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) School staff, special education staff, support staff, instructional coach Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) -DRP Fountas and Adaptable Computer-Based Resources (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) Pinnell i-Ready Diagnostic Professional Development (Mondays from 3:00-4:20 from 9/18 - 6/19) Algebra for All teacher will attend 4 off-site trainings over the cost of the school year (Beginning in October 2018 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22 and the rest of which TBD) Adaptable, computer-based resources: iReady and MyOn are both adaptable, computer-based systems, that provide comprehension questions based on the student’s reading level. Professional development: Teachers will be trained in best practices for working with SWDs and ELLS in their classrooms. Math teachers will continue to participate in the district wide math cohort. These teachers will learn and utilize best practices. They will also turn-key strategies learned with their colleagues. Additional student supports: To ensure that each student receives the supports he/she needs, we have strategically embedded ELT time into the school day. Each period will approximately 10 minutes long, and a extra period each day. MSQI will provide strategies and resources to support middle school students. Next school year we will continue to offer after school and Saturday Academy Programs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23 Parents, families, and students Attendance, ELA benchmark Teachers, IEP Teacher, Special Education Supervisor, PPT Team, Community School Director and CBO team, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Title I Coordinator, PA President MyOn, iReady, Imagine Learning, formative and summative assessments, Parent Attendance, Skedula/Pupil Path Monthly Publishing Parties (Every 4-6 weeks as designed by the TCRWP program) Parent Access (Daily from 9/18 - 6/19) Student-led conferences (As scheduled according to the NYCDOE calendar) Parents as Partners (Monthly during parent engagement time; Monday from 2:20 - 3:00pm) Engage families and expand their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home. Monthly Publishing parties: Parents and families are invited to end of unit publishing parties to listen to their child's published writing pieces. Parent access: iReady and MyOn provides parent access. We are also engaging parents in students’ progress through a school-wide implementation of Skedula/Pupil Path, which encourages families to keep track of students’ academic performance on classroom assignments, and easily communicate with teachers as needed. Student Led Conferences Parents are invited to support their child’s reading and writing development through student led conferences. Students will share evidence of their progression in reading comprehension and writing stamina with support from their teachers. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Parents as partners: Through school-based family workshops and communications (Pupil Path), staff will collaborate with parents to establish routines and provide resources to improve independent reading and build vocabulary development. Parents will be encouraged to visit the school website to view current units of study and strategies to create print rich environments and provide opportunities for their child to read and write at home. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. TCRWP running records i-Ready online diagnostic and instruction in ELA and math for Grades K-8 New York Ready Instruction and Practice in ELA and Math for grades 2- 8. Go Math Mental Math Dolch Assessment Fry Assessment Word Generation (including printing of materials) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Fundations (K-2) Classroom Leveled Libraries Teacher’s College Writing Units of Study Teacher's College Reading Units of Study Model Teacher/Math Coach Peer Collaborative Teacher Contracted Literacy Coaches for K-5 and 6-8 Contracted Special Education Coach Online resources such as iReady and MyON Per Session for Data Analysis Per Diem for Absence Coverage to support PD opportunities for staff Nearpod DRP Resources and Assessments Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 45% of our students will evidence an increase in reading comprehension as measured by the TCWRP (K-5) and DRP(6-8) Running Records. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCWRP Running Records, DRP and I-Ready ELA Diagnostic Assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 revealed that an area of strength for the school is the social-emotional measure for safety and order. This reflects our school leaders’ capacity to establish overarching systems to support and sustain student social and emotional health. This report further revealed that students' personal attention and support had a metric value of 95 in the category of Supportive Environment. A strength of the school is the effort of stakeholders working together to foster a supportive environment for our students as evidenced by the Framework for Great Schools Report metric value of 93 in teacher outreach to parents, 94 in parent-teacher trust, and 94 in parent-principal trust. Additionally, 65% of students say that teachers notice when they are upset or having emotional difficulty, which is significantly above the city average of 56%. The 2018 Developmental Asset Profile (DAP) student survey also revealed that family and school were the highest asset-building categories (in that order), above the areas of, social, personal and community (in that order). At the same time, the Learning Environment Survey 2017-2018 revealed that only 72% responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment. 74% of students feel safe in school (City Average: 85%) thus we can still make improvements in this area. According to the OORS Occurrence Snapshot 2017-2018, more than half of all reported incidents during that school year were related to student to student physical interactions. The priority need will be to nurture students' social and emotional competencies, encourage the growth of their non-cognitive skills (so that they can self-regulate and actively engage in learning), and then promote and develop students’ developmental assets, in other words, the strengths and supports they have in their lives. According to the DAP survey data, 57% of our students scored at the Adequate and Thriving levels combined, which means 43% of our students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  scored at the Vulnerable or Challenged levels. The area our students scored highest is the categories of support, boundaries and expectations, and commitment to learning. The areas that scored lowest are constructive use of time and positive values. It is clear that there is considerable room to improve our students’ experience of assets, but the data provided through this research based survey will help us target where and how we will focus our efforts. We recognize that in order to foster our children's social emotional learning and asset development, we must simultaneously infuse it into classroom instruction. The 2017-2018 Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) evidence showed 74% effective ratings; teacher planning time and pacing of lessons has shown measurable growth. The Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 revealed that the overall effort to press toward academic achievement was rated as a metric value of 92. With a concerted effort to target the pacing and planning of lessons, coupled with a commitment to building students' social emotional competencies, the outcome will be to increase students time on task in a more supportive environment. This is also supported by the fact that the lowest asset category on the DAP, and the only one to fall into the vulnerable rating overall, was Constructive Use of Time. As mentioned above, the second lowest category was positive values. Thus, we are committed to providing opportunities, outside of the academic school day, for students to learn and develop new skills and interests with other youth and adults, and to continue to strengthen our universal supports around supporting values and character development. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Fundations (Wilson), MSQI, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, New York Junior Tennis League (NYJTL), Sheltering Arms/Safe Space, Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) and Broadway Junior help us to assess and identify the academic, social-emotional, and physical, artistic and health needs of the student population and provide services such as: individual and group mentoring, individual and group counseling, ELT enrichment and remediation, parent workshops, after school and summer programs, targeted academic interventions, leadership opportunities and community celebrations. These partnerships help ensure a thriving, healthy community that has access to a variety of wellness supports such as the establishment of quality mental health services including an on-site mental health clinic. PS/MS 42Q is using a positive youth development framework for social emotional learning and students' development of non-cognitive skills. The framework focuses on supporting students' developmental assets, the external supports and internal qualities that serve as the building blocks for student success. To implement this framework, we are using the Character Counts Character Education Program, Sanford Harmony, research-based PYD activities, and PBIS as tier one, universal supports. For the 2018-2019 school year, student voice and leadership will be developed and supported through student council, safety patrol, the middle school Peer Group Connect program, our peer mentoring program, and a school-wide commitment to Restorative Circles. In addition to our universal tier one supports, the school will focus on targeted interventions to address specific student needs as determined by needs assessment, and partnership between parents, teacher and support staff. For tier two and three counseling needs, students will be referred to our mental health / youth advocate partners that include Sheltering Arms and FHI 360, as well as our school-based mental health staff. Tier 2 and 3 supports also include our expanded success mentor program, and our targeted student support groups. Through the implementation of two metrics: 1) a developmental assets profile (DAP) assessment, and 2) a universal mental health screening tool, we will be able to continuously analyze and measure the social-emotional development of the student population. Teachers, community partners and school leaders will consistently these data to implement proactive measures and determine counseling, mentoring, and mental health needs of the student population. After a year of working with DAP, we recognize that it is more effective to set our goals related to moving students from vulnerable to adequate, as this is the key to ongoing success in school and life. We will again use data tools to continually identify students with attendance and punctuality concerns. Once identified, the team will work to determine root causes and appropriate interventions. We will communicate that attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  matters and improved attendance is recognized through monthly ceremonies and awards. In addition, our Community School CBO will support us in fostering the home-school connection, and clearly communicating our community expectations around attendance. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus FHI360 Support tiered SEL supports and interventions. Support school-wide strategies. Sheltering Arms / Safe Space Provide tiered mental health interventions. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? FHI 360 has helped us to create systems and structures related to positive youth development and attendance interventions and supports. We are looking forward to having another year to go deeper into this work and support teachers in universal ownership of these processes. We are also hiring new youth development staff to help coordinate the school-wide strategies for Social Emotional Learning (SEL) and building a positive classroom environment. This includes providing PD and coaching on effective classroom management, student engagement, and positive youth development. It also includes supporting the school's PBIS initiative, and creating an integrated set of supports and responses to help build a positive environment. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June, 2019, our SWD's will develop increased social and emotional skills through the incorporation of the RULER approach into our PBIS "be buck" system, which will result in a 5% decrease of incidents resulting from student to student physical interactions, as reported in OORS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Developmental assets profile (DAP) Student behavior Time and Attendance Benchmark Increased student academic proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) PBIS; RULER, Safe Public Spaces Pre-K-8 students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Developmental Assets and Student behavior PBIS Team, CSD, Consultant from Safe Public Spaces, SLT and Parent Groups and Teaching Staff How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased distribution of "Be Bucks", reduction in OORS 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to be members of the PBIS and Social Emotional Learning Committee. There will be monthly PBIS meetings including all committee members. Teachers will include social-emotional and behavior expectations in the monthly newsletters. Teachers will also maintain daily/weekly communication with parents and caregivers throughout the school year via Skedula, class DOJO and other sources. September, 2018- June, 2019 Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS "Be Buck" Store incentive materials Restorative Circle materials Partnership With Children Student planners with a Character Counts theme DAP surveys Per Diem for Absence Coverage for PD opportunities for staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Bank Street Emotionally Responsive Practices Teddy Bear Program Materials for the RULER program Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019, our SWD's will develop increased social and emotional skills through the incorporation of the RULER approach into our PBIS "be buck" system, which will result in a 2.5% decrease of incidents resulting from student to student physical interactions, as reported in OORS. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Developmental Asset Profile (DAP) and modified version of the Developmental Assets Survey administered in November, 2018 and March, 2019. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data indicates that an area of strength at PS/MS 42Q is that teachers have opportunities for reflective dialogue. The Framework for Great Schools Report 2017, reveals that for the indicator Collaborative Teachers, in the measure of Reflective Dialogue, the school received a metric of 100. The practice of teachers and students working together is an area of concern as evidenced by the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 metric rating of 70 for the measure of collective responsibility. Similarly, according to Teach Boost data, less than 50% of teachers were rated "Effective" in component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, during the 2017-18 school year. Therefore, the priority need is to improve teachers' capacity to: make students fully aware of the assessment criteria and performance standards; monitor student learning; provide timely and high quality feedback to students; and create opportunities for students to self-assess and monitor their own progress against the assessment criteria and performance standards. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? School Leaders have established a schedule that promotes weekly Grade Team meetings as well as vertical planning time for grade bands. Common planning time takes place on Tuesday, which was strategically planned so that that teams could meet during their preparation period the day after Monday afternoon Professional Development. This was done so that teachers could reflect and plan out practices that were presented. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Instruction is Common Core aligned and differentiated to address all learning styles. Lessons and tasks include Multiple Entry Points to help scaffold learning. We are moving to an interdisciplinary approach so that content specific information, reading comprehension strategies, and academic vocabulary will connect across all content subjects. Each classroom will utilize the Character Counts and PBIS programs to promote safety and mutual respect in their classrooms. Teachers work in Inquiry groups where they meet to discuss identified groups of students and analyze data across curricula. They use data over time to track student progress, adapting instruction to meet student needs. Our school also has two Model Teachers as well as an instructional coach. These professional learning communities encourage teachers to learn together, plan together, and reflect on their craft. The focus of this year's inquiry will be reading comprehension and it's connection to student's independent reading levels . How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? A team of teachers will work to support the continued development of a Data Wise team on every grade that will complete a minimum of 2 complete cycles focusing on student's strengths and challenges specific to reading comprehension. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Utilizing the Data Wise protocol teacher teams will collaborate to: use of protocols to analyze data; inter-visitations; laboratory classrooms; collective brainstorming; and the development, implementation, and assessment of action plans to improve teacher practices and student achievement. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration across teacher teams will take place twice a month and will include: the use of protocols to analyze data; inter-visitations to lab-site classroom; collective brainstorming; and the development, implementation, and assessment of action plans to improve teacher practices and student achievement. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Formative assessments Summative assessments To determine the effectiveness of instruction and identify student needs Intent To determine if benchmarks are being achieved Teacher artifacts Lesson plans and observations to ensure effective practices Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  By June 2019, a minimum of nine Data Wise Improvement Process (DWIP) teams will complete at least two Data Wise(inquiry) cycles with a focus on SWDs. This process will result in a .1 increase of the overall rating in 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA benchmark Math benchmark Attendance benchmark 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? All Staff iReady Diagnostic (Math & ELA) Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Middle School Quality Initiative (1)September 2018- October 2018 (2)January 2019- February 2019 (3) May 2019- September 2018 TC Writing Pre On Demand Assessments TC Writing Post On Demand Assessments Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Upon Completion of Unit (approximately 6 weeks) September 2018 January 2019 May 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) TeachBoost and Advance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Professional Learning Communities: The administrative team will meet with TDEC to refine the observation process of norming and feedback to the teachers. The administrative team will meet with the instructional teams (ELA and Math Coach, Grade Team Leaders, and Master Teachers) on a monthly basis to discuss common trends and best practices. The administrative team will conduct instructional rounds TCWRP Reading Levels November 2018 Go Math Pre-Assessment January 2019 March 2019 June 2019 October 2018 End of Unit Go Math Assessments October 2018 Upon Completion of modules (approximately every 6 weeks) Gallery Walk & Reflections Upon completion of 8-10 week cycles All Staff Instructional Leadership Team including School Administrators TeachBoost and Advance. Instructional walk- 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36 throughs and inter-visitations Bi-weekly PPT and SIT Meetings beginning September 13, 2018 School Based Support Team, Assistant Principal (s), Guidance counselor, Speech Pathologist, Sheltering Arms School Leaders Dates to be determined by the Borough Field Support ELA and Math benchmark Attendance benchmark Turn key to staff, feedback to staff, and observations. Student work products. TeachBoost and Advance TeachBoost and Advance once a week with a pre-determined lens (e.g., lesson plans, implementation of PD, use of best practices). The additional time spent in the classrooms will be interwoven into each teacher’s observation cycle. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups All Staff including Special Education staff Principal and Assistant Principals Professional Development: Administrators will attend PD regarding SWDs and ELLs initiatives, as well as to keep up on district policies and procedures. They will turnkey the information to all relevant faculty and staff. Special Needs Observation Lens: Teacher’s ability to incorporate SWD and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  ELLs strategies and policies into their classroom instruction will be assessed through classroom observations and snapshot. Engage families and expand their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home. Celebrations: As we improve teacher pedagogy and student achievement, parents encouraged to share in our celebration of student success. All Staff, all families ELA, Math, and attendance benchmarks Title 1, PA President, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, classroom teachers and administrators September 2018 November 2018 March 2019 May 2019 SKEDULA, parent attendance at parent teacher conferences, increased calls between families and teachers, student attendance, Learning Environment Survey 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops with parents led by teachers; Academic Parent Teacher Teams, in the Middle School, during Parent-Teacher Conferences as well as Parent Engagement time (Mondays, immediately following dismissal). A Monthly Newsletter by each grade team, to be sent home by teachers, and downloaded on Pupil Path. This will be overseen by classroom teachers, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator as well as the Community School Director. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. iReady supplies Per Diem for Coverage for PD opportunities for staff Coaching staff SchoolDataCorp DataWise Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, a minimum of nine Data Wise Improvement Process (DWIP) teams will complete at least one Data Wise(inquiry) cycles with a focus on SWDs. This process will result in a .05 increase of the overall rating in 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric, Observations, Teach Boost, Advance Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 indicates that the strongest leadership areas are in the measures of "Inclusive Principal Leadership," which has a 92 percent response and a score of 3.4 and "Program Coherence," which has an 82 percent positive response and a score of 3.44. The area that received the lowest score was "Teacher Influence," with a 63 percent positive response. As a Renewal School, much of the curriculum and program choices are mandated, and thus present challenges to making this a priority focus area. The area of "Instructional Leadership," received a 76 percent positive response, which makes it an important area of focus. Data from the School Quality Review for the 2017-18 school year can further clarify this area of focus. The only area PS/MS 42Q received a score of "Developing" in was Quality Review indicator 3.1. This speaks to "Establishing a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based, goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community." Thus, this will be the priority area of focus for school leadership during the 2018-19 school year. The primary means of accomplishing this coherent vision and shared data-based goals will be by having grade level teams work collaboratively to follow the Data Wise Improvement Process (DWIP), supported by school leadership. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  The school leadership will articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community by continuing a dialogue with school staff, students, families and the community through Meet the Teacher Night, Breakfast with the Principal, Community Forums, Monthly Assemblies, Parent Teacher Conferences, and workshops. Leadership will ensure that the CBO partnerships remains strong by continuing to build upon the work established by the CBO in conjunction with the community school committee. The CBO partners will continue to collaborate with school staff to ensure students’ academic and social-emotional needs are met through the implementation of a developmental asset assessment, consistent analysis of data, and the implementation of mentoring, counseling, and mental health services for the entire student population. The school leadership will continue to utilize Teachboost and Advance to monitor progress and create professional development opportunities to address areas of focus on a continual basis. The school leader will work with school based Professional Learning Committees to formulate plans and conduct teacher training and support in DWIP. Collaborations will be made with the CBOs, SLT and the Community School Committee. Student and teacher programs will be organized so that student needs are met by strategically utilizing budget sources to fund needed resources, to enrich the academic, social-emotional, behavioral and overall well-being of each student. Additionally, school leadership will continue to utilize Teachboost; an online low inference observational tool with teacher and administrative feedback. The tool allows for timely and frequent feedback. An observation schedule will be developed to ensure that all teachers receive regular and timely feedback on their observations. The schedule will include an opportunity for teachers to reflect on the lesson observed and discuss with the observer. Shared accountability of student success will be supported by involving partners. Partners will be invited into the school throughout the year so that the school leader can inform them of school initiatives to improve school structures and to create plans to address current and upcoming needs in a collaborative manner. Meetings will be scheduled periodically and methodically throughout the school year. Focus will be on distributing leadership to teacher leaders to facilitate meetings and PDs, and serve as a point person for certain initiatives. The Community School Director will be given similar duties and will play a central role in establishing and maintaining community partnerships. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? I will focus on tapping into the talents of my staff in order to foster a culture of distributive leadership. Administration will facilitate Professional Learning to support the schools Instructional Focus. Teacher leaders will spear head school-wide initiatives such as MSQI, APTT, IO Classroom (school based parent engagement tool). Fundations- teachers who have been trained, will be facilitating in house PD and support staff. Teachers trained in Algebra for All will turn key and support the roll out of this initiative to math teachers. Our Science teacher for K-5 will unpack Amplify Science to support teachers. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? In our newly designed school program/schedule for 2018-2019, there is a dedicated period of time each week for all school personnel to meet, as well as time for grade-level/content teacher teams to collaborate. This fosters a climate that embodies the vision, mission, and instructional focus of PS/MS 42Q. Through a school-wide use of the DWIP protocols, teachers are able to build their capacity and ownership to engage in and apply strategies that promote the instructional focus in their classes in highly effective ways. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? I identified teachers throughout all grade bands to be trained in TC Writing, who have and will continue to turnkey the PD and will support their colleagues in implementing effective TC Writing practices. In 2015-2016, the DWIP was launched with one team in each grade band (grade 2, grade 4, and grade 6). In the 2016-2017 year, the initiative expanded to all grades utilizing the teacher leaders who were early adopters of DWIP. In addition, one teacher per grade band, was identified and participated in professional development conducted by Math Solutions. These teachers took on the lead in the 2017-18 school year as additional teachers will receive training over the summer in Math Solutions and will implement the practices this coming school year. For the 2018-19 school year we will continue with Teacher Leadership by including 1 Peer Collaborative Teacher and 2 Model Teachers. Each will have a specific focus/role including: literacy coach, data, instructional pedagogy and SWD's. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Collaborative school governance will be evident through the SLT, PA, Title I, and the Community School Initiative. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy 3 days Daily however, for evaluative purposes the frequency would be dependent on the Observation Option selected by the teacher the school leader will norm practices with the administrative cabinet to ensure accuracy in both ratings and feedback provided to teachers What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Assessment data entered into DropBox and analyzed by DataCorp and in school Data Specialist Technology DataCorp IEPs SESIS IEP Teacher, School Assessment Team, Special Education Supervisor How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Programming will be done with a focus on programming students as opposed to programming classes. An emphasis will be placed on having teachers teach in the content area where they are most proficient. Additionally, there will be a school wide focus on ensuring that attention to learning styles is an integral component of every lesson plan. The budget will be aligned with the instructional needs of the school community. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June, 2019 the overall rating of developing teachers in domain 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) will have an overall increase of .22% as measured by MOTP Advance Reports. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA benchmark Math benchmark Teacher retention 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Staff ELA and math benchmark Sept. 2018 - School Leaders, early adopters of DWIP June 2019 Attendance benchmark How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachboost and Advance Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Creating a Culture of Professional Learning: School administrators and coaches will monitor teaching practices and student engagement through learning outcomes. Teachers will be supported in their learning and implementation of best practices and support teachers in making the leap from theory to practice. Administrators and coaches will also provide instructional modeling and provide teachers with opportunities to participate in classroom inter-visitations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Observations: An observation schedule will be aligned with teacher option selections. Professional Learning Communities: The administrative team will meet with TDEC to refine the observation process of norming and feedback to the teachers. The administrative team will meet with the instructional teams (ELA and Math Coach, Grade Team Leaders, and Master Teachers) on a monthly basis to discuss common trends and best practices. The administrative team will conduct instructional rounds once a week with a pre-determined lens (e.g., lesson plans, implementation of PD, use of best practices). The additional time spent in the classrooms will be interwoven into each teacher’s observation cycle. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups All staff including special education staff Professional Development: Administrators will attend PD regarding SWDs and ELLs initiatives, as well as to keep up on district ELA and math benchmark Attendance benchmark September 2018-June 2019 Coaches, Model and Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers,New Teacher Mentors, DWIP early adopters Teachboost and Advance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  policies and procedures. They will turnkey the information to all relevant faculty and staff. Special Needs Observation Lens: Teacher’s ability to incorporate SWD and ELLs strategies and policies into their classroom instruction will be assessed through classroom observations and snapshot. Engage families and expand their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home. Celebrations: As we improve teacher pedagogy and student achievement, parents encouraged to share in our celebration of student success. All Staff, all families ELA, Math, and attendance benchmarks September 2018-June 2019 Title 1, PA President, Community School Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, teachers, administrators. SKEDULA, parent attendance at parent teacher conferences, increased calls between families and teachers, student attendance, Learning Environment Survey 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops with parents led by teachers; Academic Parent Teacher Teams, in the Middle School, during Parent-Teacher Conferences as well as Parent Engagement time (Mondays, immediately following dismissal). Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TeachBoost DataWise resources 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  Parent Workshops Per Session for staff/administrators to plan collaboratively Coaching staff Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 the overall rating of developing teachers in Using Assessment in Instruction (3d) will increase .11 as measured by MOTP Advance Reports. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachboost, Advance and Dropbox Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Framework for Great Schools Report 2017-2018 online edition, In the area of "Strong Family-Community Ties" the school received a score of 3.3. The school received the highest scores in the measures of "Outreach to Parents" (92%, score of 3.4), and effective family partnerships (score of 3.5 and QR rating of Proficient). The measure presenting the greatest need is, "Parent Involvement in School" with a score of 3.14 and an 87% positive response rate. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Teachers will keep a detailed log of all interactions with families. Teachers will effectively utilize time allocated to engage families in discussion about their children, their needs etc., so that teachers can assess how each child learns best. This information will also be gathered from learning style surveys and interest surveys. The school is currently working on plans for space for families so that there may be more constant collaboration, with a strong focus on the roll out of Pupil Path. Parents will be partners in elevating student progress through class visitations, planning and attending academic celebrations, and being members of school committees designed to improve school structures. The school will also continue to provide a range of family learning opportunities such as a parent academy, GED program, asset-building workshops, communicating with your children, and understanding the common core curricula. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Families will be able to access and understand data and progress through communication with teachers, progress reports, online communication and trainings. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Our community school has made it a central priority to provide open channels of communication with families through newsletters, community-wide events, parent-teacher conferences, celebrations, and regular communications between school and home, both in-person, via telephone and email, and now through Pupil Path. Communication is carried about administrators, teachers, and members of the community school team. The parent coordinator and the Title I/PAC Chair have rooms where parents can meet and gather. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Through the community-wide events, the community school team works in collaboration with other parent leadership groups (PA, Title I, etc.) to identify parents who can take on leadership roles in the community (by serving on the SLT, on the PA, Title I, Community School Committee, etc.). How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? In addition to the opportunities provided above, we will begin implementing student-led parent teacher conferences to promote student ownership of their learning and to change the family school dynamic. The roll out of the Pupil Path/Skedula system will also promote increased family teacher collaboration and will allow the teacher and the parent to work collaboratively to support student development. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent teacher conferences (student-led) Welcome families to be active partners in student learning. Skedula Common Core Workshops Keep parents up to date on assignments, due dates, progress, attendance and assessments. Teachers will help parents learn how to support their children at home. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: SLT, PA, Title I Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Committee, community events, attendance success mentoring 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. The community school office, the Title I office, and the Parent Coordinator office. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? As a learning hub in the community, PS/MS 42 has begun to offer a range of adult learning activities. We will continue the GED/TASC program we started this year, and will supplement that with an Adult Learning Academy to provide more foundational learning skills than a GED/TASC program can provide. In addition, we will continue to offer a range of adult workshops, clubs, and classes around such topics as child development, workforce readiness, and yoga. We will also provide workshops for families to support their child's learning at home. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Pupil Path will provide a progress feedback loop so families can keep track of their child's scholastic progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, a minimum of 60% of caretakers will actively log in to Pupil Path to obtain information about their child's academic progress resulting in an increased home-school connection. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA benchmarks Math benchmarks Attendance benchmarks 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? School Community ELA, math, student asset building, and attendance benchmarks September 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director and FHI 360 Staff, Community Associate, Parents Association, Title I. Enrollment/attendance at community events and adult classes. Skedula usage report. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Adult Academic Classes: In the fall, PS/MS 42 will offer an adult learning academy to provide basic academic knowledge and skills to adults who left school before acquiring all of the expected knowledge and skills of a high school graduate. In the spring, we will offer our second GED/TASC program at the school for parents and members of the community who are interested in completing a GED degree. Dates to be determined. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Workshops for Parents: There will be a range of workshops for families that will be facilitated by school staff, FHI 360, PA, Title 1 and other partner organizations. These include workshops on how to use Skedula, how to build children’s confidence, how to communicate effectively with children, build children’s developmental assets, the importance of attendance, etc. Faculty and staff will also conduct workshops to support parents in understanding the Common Core Curriculum and supporting students’ academic success. These workshops will also increase awareness of academic expectations, school academic targets and promotional requirements. Workshops focused on CCLS in response to the curriculum being used and the disconnect experienced by many around the math being taught. Family Events: As a community school, PS/MS 42 will be engaging families and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  the community through a range of large community events including Character Counts family events, Fall Festival, Community School Forum, Thanksgiving Meal, Winter Holiday Wonderland, Spring Celebration, and more. Parents will play an active volunteer role in planning and running these events. Dates to be determined. Parent Teacher Conferences: We will continue to develop parent teacher conferences to make them more collaborative, including student-led conferences, as per the DOE calendar. Parents Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups Wrap-Around Services: We are expanding our range of services to ensure students are receiving the services and supports they need. This includes attention to students’ physical health, mental health, and ELA, math, student asset building, and attendance benchmarks September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Coaches and teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director and CBO Staff, school administration, Mental Health CBOs, Parent Association President, Title I. Enrollment/attendance at community events and adult classes. Skedula/Pupil Path usage report. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  food and nutrition needs. We are adding new partners to round out our mental health supports, and we will be providing families with access to community mental health clinic, where students can receive services. Social workers and other staff will also be committed to providing families with a range of referrals to other available city services. Accessibility: Communication to parents will be translated into families native language. Million Father March; bring your father to school day facilitated by Parent Coordinator and Community associates. Engage families and expand their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home. Integrated Set of Parent Groups: The Community School Coordinator, the Parent Coordinator, the PA President, and the Title 1 Families of PS/MS42 school Community ELA, math, student asset building, and attendance benchmarks September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community School Director and CBO Staff, school administration, Mental Health CBOs, Parents Association, Title I. Skedula/Pupil Path, parent attendance at parent teacher conferences, increased calls between families and teachers, student attendance, Learning Environment Survey 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Coordinator will align their supports and services to have a collaborative outreach plan that is inclusive and effective in engaging all families. Thus parents will have multiple opportunities to participate in meaningful and active ways (by serving on the SLT, the Community School Committee, the Parent Association, or Title 1). Building Strong School/Family Relationships: We have a multi-pronged strategy this year for regular school-parent communication and relationship building. Staff and family engagement partners will work together to meet and greet parents at dismissal and drop-off. There will be regular check-ins (calls home) to family members to discuss the student, to ensure that calls are being made to recognize hard work and strengths, as well as areas of challenge. Families will have multiple opportunities to participate on committees and help plan and implement 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  community school events. Ongoing and Regular Family Communication: Each month, FHI 360 will help us to create a newsletter to update and engage families on the key work that month. Parent workshops, events, and opportunities will be clearly communicated and advertised. We are also rolling out Skedula, a web-based grade book and family communication tool that let’s families know how their child is doing in school and provides opportunities for parents and teachers to communicate. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Skedula Workshop facilitators CSD Parent Coordinator Materials and resources for translation and English classes Per Session for Staff/Administrators Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a minimum of 30% of caretakers will actively log in to Pupil Path to obtain information about their child's academic progress resulting in an increased home-school connection. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students will demonstrate an increase in ELA progress and 80% of students will demonstrate an increase in Math progress. This year, our ELT focus will be to ensure that programming for the student rather than the class. This will help us to better meet the needs of all students, including our ELL and SWD population, by targeting content and instructional strategies for specific learner needs. Students will be grouped into ELT practices based on targeted need and interest. This will be delivered through targeted small group instruction, including Academic Intervention Services (AIS), that is focused on remediation and enrichment for common learning challenges. NYS Exam scores and proficiency ratings as well as i-Ready interim data will serve as measures to track 75% increase in ELA progress and 80% increase in Math progress. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All students are programmed for an additional 1 hour and 15 minutes Tuesday-Friday as evidenced in STARS. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? ELT will provide scaffolded support for all students, including our ENL and SWD population, by targeting content and instructional strategies for different learner needs. In 2018-2019, we will change our approach to ELT to ensure that we are programming for the student rather than the class. Students will be grouped based on targeted needs and interests. Pedagogical practice will consist of differentiated instruction to address student learning styles, interests, and abilities; this will be delivered through small group instruction, including but not limited to Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with a focus on remediation and enrichment, beginning this summer with the introduction Collaborative Team Teaching; and Inquiry Focus groups providing support to students requiring additional support. The instructional focus will be on thoughtfully planned student learning, focused on higher order thinking, rigor and multiple entry points. Using a triangulation of data that consists of assessment data, learning styles survey data and daily observational data, teachers will ensure lessons are designed to include the learning style of every child and provide opportunities for multiple entry points to ensure student progress and success. Consistency in a longer learning day will be specifically established through the ELT program which will be scheduled for the entire school to meet the needs of all students. Our ELT will include ELA and math targeted instruction, literacy and STEM enrichment, and social and emotional learning classes. This additional period allows us to schedule elective classes to middle school students to support the Middle School Quality Initiative that we were fortunate to receive for the upcoming school year. It will also allow us the ability to build in word study and build vocabulary into our literacy workshops, as well as have the time to support math instruction with Math Solutions This new manifestation of ELT will provide us the ability to provide targeted ELA and Math instruction, small group targeted supports, social emotional learning sessions, and enrichment electives. During this time, teachers will have access to resources such as MyOn and iReady to support measurable student growth. Programming will be done at the student, as opposed to the class levels, with students being grouped for ELT by need and interest and opposed to by their academic day class grouping. The computer-based ELA supports (e.g., iReady and MyOn) will provide differentiated instruction based on students' reading levels, so students can experience a common article at their own instructional level. This will increase student engagement and confidence as a reader. The targeted math ELT activities include dynamic, hands-on STEM programs that encourage students to engage in real math/science exploration. These programs include the Lego-Robotics, Harlem Magic Masters, Student Government PGC and others. All core subjects offered during the Renewal Hour will be taught by licensed teachers. We will offer targeted PD workshops for Community Educators to become familiar with our Character Counts program and Positive Youth Development framework, so that students can experience consistent messaging throughout the entire day -- from the academic day to afterschool. The FHI 360 Community School Director will be the primary point person for family outreach and communicating the opportunities that are being made available to students. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? School Leader will work closely with the FHI360, and the Community School Director, to implement and oversee the ELT program. 2. 3.   The UFT completed their SBO vote of how the ELT schedule will be determined.  Community educators (including NYJTL and NY Edge) will be the primary staff for the after-school, extra-curricular activities, though school staff are encouraged and invited to participate.  The PA and Title I are taking an active role in collaborating on some extra-curricular after-school supports.  We will track student participation in ELT and afterschool activities to determine how these supports and interventions are impacting student achievement. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. By mid October 2018 students be placed in their first ELT learning cycle. Groups will be evaluated and updated based on student needs every six weeks (December, February, April). Grade level teams will work collaboratively with administration and leadership staff to track student growth and use data to inform flexible grouping. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ELT materials and resources MyOn i-Ready STEM programs (e.g., Bricks 4 Kidz) MSQI Enrichment electives funded by FHI360 Mental health staff Harlem Magic Masters Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, it is expected that 40% of the students will demonstrate progress in ELA with 35% demonstrating progress in Math as evidenced by the data gleaned from i-Ready Diagnostic assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady Diagnostic assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, our attendance rate will meet our stated benchmark of 90.6%, as measured by daily ATS attendance records and the New Visions Student Portal.. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance benchmark Punctuality benchmark Family engagement and outreach benchmarks Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service FHI 360 All students / severely chronically absent and chronically absent students Sheltering Arms / Safe Space Students who have mental health needs Help develop school wide tiered attendance strategies that include school-wide strategies and then targeted interventions for students with attendance challenges. Provide counseling services to help students develop and maintain mental health and the mindset necessary to be successful in school Success Mentors Severely chronically absent and chronically absent Work as a success mentor for a subgroup of students Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  3. 4. coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Our Renewal Community School, paired with FHI 360, a community based organization (CBO) through the for Community School Initiative, and in partnership with the SLT hired our third Community School Director. In order to address the needs of all students, we will continue to analyze the data gathered in our needs and assets assessments. The Community School Director has taken the lead in analyzing student attendance data with a focus on chronic absenteeism, and lateness as a secondary lens. Tiered supports and interventions for student attendance issues are one of our primary focus areas. The work will be implemented through tiered supports such as the implementation of: tier one supports ( STEM programs, and enrichment electives); tier two targeted interventions (clubs/activities, group counseling, attendance check-ins, etc.), and tier three intensive interventions (one-on-one counseling, tutoring, attendance supports, etc.). Focus is also being placed on long-term mental health services and support. We have selected Sheltering Arms / Safe Space as our Mental Health Provider because in addition to being able to provide a mental health clinic in the school, they are also providing our families access to an out-patient mental health clinic in the community to address psychiatric needs the therapist may not be qualified to handle. This resource will provide universal, targeted, and specific services to students. Among those are: push-in classroom support, de-escalation strategies, small group student workshop, teacher and parent workshops, one-on-one student counseling, and referrals to additional services. These mental health supports will be part of the overall behavior strategy; individual students exhibiting chronic behavioral issues will be provided with one on one mentoring and other support services. The effectiveness of these programs and services will be continually assessed and measured by the Community Schools Director through observation of program implementation and its’ impact on students within the program and the classroom. Our Community School focus is dedicated to including parents and families as true partners in student success. We are working to create a team of parent leaders who are helping us to ensure the school is a place families feel welcome and where their voice is heard. The Community School Director is coordinating these conversations through the Community School Committee, and through his participation and on ongoing dialogue with the various parent constituent groups. The CSD will also continue coordinating activities such as the community Forum, Parent Workshops, and the work of the Community School Committee. The CBO Community School Director will take the lead in organizing and presenting student data for different leadership groups to identify need and assess progress. This includes student success attendance meeting, the school wellness committee meetings, the community school committee, and grade level meetings. The Principal and AP's will work closely with the Community School Director to ensure that these meetings occur on a regular basis and key personnel are present. Weekly data meetings will be an opportunity for staff and CBO partners to analyze data to inform the flexible grouping and provision of tiered services to our students. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community School Director will take the lead in implementing the Community School program, along with the Principal and Community School Committee. In 2018-19 the team will also include a mental health counselor, an instructional coach, and a resource coordinator/technology specialist. Other members of the Community School team include the therapists from Sheltering Arms / Safe Space (our mental health partner) and after school instructors. The Community School Committee serves as a representation of all the stakeholders in the school including teachers, administration, parents, and CBOs. Next steps will be to include students on the committee as well so they can have a voice in determining the direction of the Renewal School Committee. The Community School Director and the After-School Coordinator will distribute student and teacher surveys to collect data and evaluate the programs. They will also analyze student achievement data and correlate it with specific program supports to determine which programs are having the most impact. The focus of the community school partnership will be to meet the goal to increase attendance to achieve or exceed our attendance benchmark of 90.6%, as measured by daily Scantron attendance records. There will be a purposeful effort to coordinate, implement, and revise continuously, quality services to our children and their families It is our belief that this will influence the attendance rate of our students. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Mental health Clinic, Restorative Circle, Counseling services/Wellness Center, Community School Director, FHI360, Safe Public Spaces, Peer Group Connect Program, eNact, Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Late September: Attendance meetings begin; Match chronically absent and severely chronically absent students with Success Mentors and other targeted interventions; daily attendance announcements. October: Bi-weekly attendance meetings; daily attendance trackers; daily attendance announcement, prizes and raffles, home visits, parent breakfasts. November - December: All of the above plus: Student attendance mentors; parent meetings, focus groups; Spirit week. January - March: All of the above plus: Attendance incentives (Barclays Nets tickets, Harlem Magic Masters clinics, Mets tickets, Spirit week. etc.) April - May: All of the above plus: Focus on the importance of good attendance around test time. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) New York State ELA State Exam, New York City Periodic Assessment, student portfolios Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction online support Middle School Administrative Period Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, independent, tutoring During school Day During school day Small group or one-to-one During the school day Small group During school day. ELT Wilson After- School Tutorial Program Saturday Academy -Ready Diagnostic and Instruction online support Middle School Administrative Period ELT After- School Tutorial Program Small group Small group, independent, tutoring After School 2 days a week Saturday mornings Small group Small group tutoring Small group, independent, tutoring During school Day During school day Small group or one-to-one . Small group Small group, independent, tutoring After School 2 days a week Saturday mornings Mathematics New York State ELA State Exam, New York City Periodic Assessment, student portfolios 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65 Saturday Academy Small group Science New York State Math, ELA and Science Exams, Science portfolios Middle School Administrative Period ELT After- School Tutorial Program Saturday Academy Social Studies New York State ELA Exams Middle School Administrative Period Small group tutoring Small group or one-to-one Small group, independent, tutoring Small group Small group tutoring Small group or one-to-one At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Individual Educational Plan, Teacher Referrals, Formative and Summative Assessment Data ELT Special Education Teacher Support Small group, independent, tutoring Small group Services- STARS After- School Tutorial Program Saturday Academy Counseling in Schools Small group Partnership With Children Whole Class, small group and one to Guidance Counselor one During school Day .After School 2 days a week Saturday mornings During school Day After School 2 days a week Saturday mornings During the school day. During the school day 3 days a week During school day School Psychologist One-to-one and small group During school day One-to-one 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 47 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide family support in terms of buying all necessary school materials (instructional resources, uniforms, etc.), arrange for transportation, connect students with in-school counselors, and connect parents with agencies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2 Model Teachers and a Peer Collaborative Teacher have been hired. Our hiring committee has been created collaboratively to engage in the hiring process, including the identification of school needs; attendance at job fairs; conducting Demo Lessons, etc. Mentors are assigned to all new and continuing teachers to provide one on one support. Leadership roles are created to build capacity and commitment resulting in a newly created Instructional Leadership Team(ILT) that includes the Community School Director along with teacher leaders not identified by Teacher Leadership but within the school itself. Consultants from Teacher's College will be providing PD sessions (in house) throughout the year to support the introduction and implementation of Independent Reading, Reading and Writing workshop. We also will have the support from the MSQI focusing on interdisciplinary curriculum with a focus on the Social Studies Framework Presently all teachers are teaching in their licensed area. All teachers will engage in multiple inter-visitation cycles throughout the school year. Teachers will be paired based on specific needs and pedigogical goals. These inter-visitations will commence in the beginning of the 2018-19 school year with a professional development outlining protocols and expectations of the cycles. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Model Teacher Classrooms will serve as a lab site for inter-visitations so teachers can observe best practices. Classrooms across grades have been set up as model classrooms for the Independent Reading initiative and the Teacher’s College Writing Workshop. Teachers that attend Summer Institute training will turn key and provide support to colleagues on the implementation of the new program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our school has a functioning School Leadership Team that involves the teachers appointed to participate in the selection of Professional Development as well as assessment measures. Teachers report back to their colleagues to share the decisions and selections that were made by the Team . Preschool teachers attend both specialized and school-wide PD's. Common Planning time is created so that teachers can plan vertically as well as horizontally enabling a dialog and continuity between Preschool and school age. Our Social/Emotional Learning programs are school-wide, including 3K and Preschool who participate in all layers of support. During the lunch periods, students from the elementary grades will spend their recess time in the 3K and PreK classrooms reading to the children and being a buddy. Parents are invited to attend all school wide activities and encouraged to participate in the PA and Title 1. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Through a collaborative process, the Administration and Instructional Leader Team (ILT) will analyze , discuss and identify appropriate assessment tools and professional development needed to facilitate improved instruction. Teachers meet to discuss data from various assessments to identify patterns and trends, plan next steps and make the necessary instructional adjustments through the use of the DataWise protocol. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 429,811.00 16,979.00 146,339.00 101,318.00 0 0 5,073,904.00 x x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6 5B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 42Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/MS 42Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to achieve proficiency in all academic areas through such initiatives Such as Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT). ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in the planning and decision making to support the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their child’s progress; e.g., Skedula ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 42Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and APTT I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 20 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Robert Vernam School Borough Queens School Number 042 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patricia Finn Coach Heather Faciano ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Tejada Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area L. Rodriguez Related-Service Provider Ms. Weinstein Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Nancy O'Dwyer Coach type here School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Jackie Toney Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.29%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The classroom teachers assess each student's reading level. The ENL teacher uses the NYSTELL to assess students' early literacy skills in English and the Wilson Reading program to build ELLs phonemic awareness in English. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In grades K-2 classroom teachers use Foundations-Phonics Program.Classroom Teachers in grades 3-5th assess their students' reading levels using Fountain and Pinnell four times a year. This years benchmarks will take place on Oct 13-20, January 13-20, March 16-23 and May 25-June 01st. In grade 6th we use Degrees of Reading Power part of MSQT. To assess 6-8 grade writing Teachers College Reading and Writing Project is used. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  We evaluate students with an ELL Periodic Assessment in October to identify areas of need and in March to measure their progress. We do ongoing assessment and monitoring of content area understanding and progress in the classroom. Additionally, a valuable indicator of the success of our program is to analyze how long it takes for ELL's to test out of ENL and into fully monolingual English settings. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once data has been gathered and analyzed, our instruction will be aligned to the results. We will determine which areas need targeting and to address students deficiencies. We will determine which modalities need intense focus as well as which students may be assisted with a given modality deficiency through our small group interventions. The data reveals that, as one would expect, the reading/ writing modalities are the most difficult for our ENL students to achieve proficiency in, and thus are given a more intense focus. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom teachers consult with the ENL teacher for classroom enhancements based on data they have collected regarding an ELL. Such enhancements include differentiated instruction, providing multiple entry points into lessons for students, grouping students for instruction. The school began instituting the RTI framework for differentiated instruction in October, 2013. PS/MS42's RTI plan is based upon the template distributed by the NYC Dept. of Education. Following the review of a student's assessment data, ( formal and informal), the RTI Plan is completed by the classroom teacher, for any student who shows signs of struggling academically. The RTI team meets every two weeks and discusses struggling students, and it is then determined who will receive what services. A notification letter is sent to the parent informing them of the type of intervention service their child will be receiving. The parent must sign consent in order for the child to receive services. Along with the permission slip, a letter explaining the three different types of intervention is sent home. Tier 1 receives rigorous instruction that occurs in the classroom and delivered by the gen. ed. teacher. Tier 2 refers to small group instruction for those students making adequate progress. Tier 3 provides individualized and customized interventions to students. Tiers 2 and 3 use instruction focused on specific learning targets 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across proficiency levels and grades in prior years reveal that, on average, ELLs develop English language proficiency in speaking and listening before they develop that proficiency in reading and writing. These patterns are based on data from the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Classroom teachers discuss with the ENL teacher for any classroom enhancements. These include differentiated instruction, providing multiple entry points into lessons for students, grouping students for instruction, strategies to support the development of modalities in new language acquisition. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Elementary general education classes are self-contained. Instruction is delivered utilizing Collaborative Team Teaching, Self-Contained 12:1:1, and SETTS. General education classes in the middle school are departmentalized. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Integrated ENL instruction is delivered in heterogeneous groups within the students' classroom setting within one grade, while the standalone ENL instruction is delivered through pull-out with two consecutive grades, heterogeneous groups. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL instructional minutes are delivered by the certified ENL teacher, who picks students up to ensure the service is rendered as directed by CR Part 154: [Instructional minutes are measured in units with 1 unit equal to 180 minutes.] ∙ Entering students receive 2 units per week, 1 unit in Stand-Alone ENL and 1 unit in Integrated ENL. ∙ Emerging students receive 2 units per week, 1 unit in Stand-Alone ENL and 1 unit in Integrated ENL. ∙ Transitioning students receive 1 unit per week, 0.5 unit in stand alone ENL and 0.5 in Integrated ENL. ∙ Expanding students receive 1 unit per week in Integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. ∙ Commanding students receive 0.5 unit per week in Integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. Students are grouped according to their level of English acquisition. The Entering(Beginning) students are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. 1unit of study or 4 periods is ENL and the additional unit is Integrated ENL/ELA. The Emerging students (Low Intermediate) are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. They receive 1 unit or 4 periods in ENL, 1 unit of study or 4 periods of Integrated ENL/ELA .The Transitioning (Intermediate) are given 1 unit of study per week or 180 minutes or 4 periods from which 2 periods or .5 units of study are Integrated ENL/ELA and 2 periods or.5 unit of study are ENL. The Expanding (Advanced) are given 1 unit of study per week or 180 minutes or 4 periods. All 4 periods are in other Content Area. The Commanding (Proficient) continue to receive Integrated ENL in Content area services and support (extra time in tests) for an additional two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is primarily provided by the classroom teacher; the curriculum meets the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards as the entire school has adopted texts approved by the NYCDOE to be aligned with the Common Core Standards. This includes Ready Gen and Go Math for Kindergarten to 5th grade and Code X and CMP3 (Math) for grades 6th to 8th. Teaching practices focus on the Literacy, Math, Science and Social Studies Prototypes. English is the predominant language of instruction, supplemented by those teachers and paraprofessionals who are bilingual in students' home languages. Scaffolding and differentiated instructional techniques are widely implemented, and there is a strong focus on vocabulary across the grades. Tasks are consistently modeled and students’ prior knowledge is accessed and incorporated. When available, students are provided with bilingual content area glossaries, bilingual textbooks, bilingual dictionaries, picture and bilingual picture dictionaries, native language books and articles. The ENL teacher builds students’ dictionary and reference skills. Students are grouped with peers who can provide native language support and/or academic support. Pairing and small group interaction are critical to raising the proficiency of English learners who are mainstreamed into an English-only, general academic environment. English and bilingual posters, videos, visual and manipulative aids, and realia are used whenever possible to support and facilitate comprehension. In Math building mathematics problem solving skills relies heavily on reading comprehension. ELLs will focus on literacy to assess the type of computational skills needed to solve a problem out of what they have studied. Writing tasks will provide a guided answer format that will simulate that of the New York State Exams. Familiarity with the structure of the exam will lessen the anxiety that such testing situations can create. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish-speaking, newly admitted students who do not test English proficient on the NYSITELL are given the Spanish LAB as well. ELLs who are literate in their home language are provided with native language tests when available. If not available, a translator has been brought in to orally translate the standardized tests for the students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated in the following ways: To meet the needs of SIFE students when enrolled, the ENL teacher pulls out small groups of two to four students and provides explicit instruction in the five components of reading: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. [The new SIFE curriculum, BRIDGES, will be assessed for use with PS/MS42 students.] As much native language support as possible is included, and as the student progresses, explicit instruction in writing is added. Newcomers are placed in a classroom with a teacher and/or classmates fluent in the new student's native language; the native language glossaries available from the New York State Education Department website are printed and placed in the classroom as well as in the ENL classroom; the ENL classroom has Spanish, Haitian Creole, and Arabic bilingual dictionaries as well as picture dictionaries. The ENL teacher uses computer programs (both online and on cd-rom) which translate and read aloud. Instruction is focused on building the newcomer's understanding of English phonics, syntax and vocabulary, with the strongest emphasis first on listening and speaking skills in both academic and social language. For the few ELLs who have received service for 4 to 6 years and for the few who are long-term ELLs, the instructional plan stresses development of vocabulary and higher-order thinking skills, using challenging content, in order to help ELLs use English to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in their classes. As with other ELL subgroups, data from standardized tests and classroom assessments provide information regarding particular deficiencies on which to focus, and the goal of ELLs becoming proficient English learners is pursued through the use of ENL strategies: scaffolding - modeling, bridging, schema building, contextualization, and text representation; role-playing and dramatization; multimedia support; kinesthetic engagement; small group instruction; conferencing with students; informal assessments, and focus on literacy and academic language. ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT within the previous two years are given 90 minutes of Integrated ENL each week. In addition, the classroom teachers and testing coordinator are alerted to the fact that these students receive testing modification of time and a half for two years after reaching proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use the following to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development: modeling, visual, auditory and kinesthetic methods; charts and graphs; technology; rephrasing and repetition. Grade level materials include the curriculum followed by general education classes, such as Ready Gen for grades Kindergarten to 5th and Code X for grades 6th to 8th. This school year all teachers administered a Learning Style Survey for their class. Teachers differentiate instruction using the data provided from the Learning Style Survey, Google doc., which allows teachers to focus on each students' strengths and weakness. Teachers also utilize Drop Box which offers differentiation strategies for particular students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school enables diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by having the ENL teacher create her schedule based on data analysis and students' schedules. This allows ELL-SWDs to receive ENL services with their general education peers. We use a variety of pedagogical methods to address the diverse learning styles of our ELL-SWDs. After reviewing their IEPs we 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  determine how best to achieve the goals outlined by planning and collaborating with the Special Education Teachers. As a result,we are able to achieve flexibility in scheduling and determine the best instructional approach and materials to be used with an individual student within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Pedagogical practices integrate academic language development, content area instruction and explicit instruction in learning strategies for both content and language acquisition. Oral and written skills development is integral to this. Best practices in use include lessons with specific language and content objectives; instruction anchored with short videos, visuals and graphic organizers to build common background knowledge and a concrete anchor for more abstract discussions; explicit academic vocabulary instruction with multiple meaningful exposures; daily guided opportunities for ELLs to talk about content in pairs and small groups, and developing skill in using writing to extend students' understanding of content. ELLs participate in targeted intervention programs such as Achieve3000, Wilson Reading program, Resource Room, Extended Day, New York Junior Tennis League After-School Program, Bucket Fillers - a school-wide behavioral management program, and an after-school homework program open to ELLs and former ELLs. All programs are conducted in English with native language support available from bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals, bilingual dictionaries and picture dictionaries, bilingual content area glossaries, Internet translation programs, and bilingual texts when available.PS/MS 42Q also offers a Saturday program which starts in January; this program runs until the State Exams have been administered. SASF is a grant which offers students 1 1/2 hours of tutorial academic services and 1 1/2 hours of sports four days a week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be expanding our ENL library and using additional ENL Language software as part of the targeted intervention programs described above. Depending on funding , we will start a language laboratory. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We plan to maintain all programs and services that we have in place for our ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Extended Day, after-school homework program for ELLs and former ELLs, and New York Junior Tennis League After- School Program provide small group instruction and interaction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. These are the instructional materials used to support ELLs: • laptop computers • Play Station III • Language for Learning series • Wilson Language program materials • Empire State NYSESLAT series • Write Source series • Achieve3000 • www.samsonsclassroom.com (sight words, spelling, and reading comprehension) • www.starfall.com (phonics, early math and literacy skills) • Reading Horizon program • Reading Rods with Reading Mentor • Heinle Picture Dictionary and workbooks (Beginning and Intermediate) • Heinle Children’s Picture Dictionary and workbook • Longman Study Dictionary 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  • Longman Dictionary of American English • variety of primary, elementary and children’s dictionaries • Harcourt Picture cards • www.Teacherfilebox.com • www.superteacherworksheets.com • Recorded Books • Sight Word Buddy (computer application) • Math manipulatives • Miscellaneous realia 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is offered by the ENL teacher and those teachers and paraprofessionals who are bilingual in the student’s home language. When available, students are provided with bilingual content area glossaries, bilingual textbooks, bilingual dictionaries, picture and bilingual picture dictionaries, native language books and articles. Students are also grouped with peers who can provide native language support and/or academic support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. While all ELLs benefit from phonemic awareness work, young students in the primary grades encounter this material in the classroom as well as with the ENL teacher. The younger students make use of websites such as Star fall.com and Samson's Classroom, and the plethora of materials that can be downloaded and printed. Older students are accommodated in the Wilson Language and the Reading Horizon programs with materials designed for them. Along with supporting ELLs academically, these programs support socialization skills. The students are offered the opportunity to feel a part of the school community 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? These are the instructional materials used to support ELLs: • laptop computers • Play Station III • Language for Learning series • Wilson Language program materials • Empire State NYSESLAT series • Write Source series • Achieve3000 • www.samsonsclassroom.com (sight words, spelling, and reading comprehension) • www.starfall.com (phonics, early math and literacy skills) • Reading Horizon program • Reading Rods with Reading Mentor • Heinle Picture Dictionary and workbooks (Beginning and Intermediate) • Heinle Children’s Picture Dictionary and workbook • Longman Study Dictionary • Longman Dictionary of American English • variety of primary, elementary and children’s dictionaries • Harcourt Picture cards • www.Teacherfilebox.com • www.superteacherworksheets.com • Recorded Books • Sight Word Buddy (computer application) • Math manipulatives • Miscellaneous realia 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELLs are provided a school tour by the ENL teacher, introduced to their classroom teacher and to students who speak their native language. For a day or two, immigrant students usually accompany the ENL teacher if they indicate strong apprehension of the new surroundings. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives at this time in the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The certified ENL teacher attends professional development conducted by the district and/or Dept of Ed. She also has attended workshops offered teachers of English language learners several times a year. Professional Development participation includes new teachers, the ENL teacher, reading and math teachers, special needs teachers, classroom and subject area teachers, Assistant Principals, as well as members of other constituencies. All staff receives professional development designed to support the implementation of the Chancellor’s Initiatives and regional and school goals for the instruction of ELLs. The school's payroll secretary maintains a record of professional development hours. The entire teaching staff at PS/MS42Q participate in weekly professional development regarding the Common Core Learning Standards. After school workshops as well as summer workshops have also been offered to the staff. Teachers are provided with specific strategies and support structures to enhance academic instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School leadership provides professional development to all guidance counselors and staff members. Guidance Counselors with the assistance of the teaching staff hold monthly Town Hall Meetings which focus on the High School Application process, Specialized High School Exam, Auditions for High Schools, completing working papers, bullying, and sexual harassment- student to student, They also conduct focus groups which will assist them in understanding and assimilating into the American culture. The ENL Teacher will provide professional development - 7.5 hours of ELL training for staff members. Staff members would receive information in areas pertaining to ELL's such as; the identification process, the Four Stages of Language Acquisition, instructional strategies to enhance teaching and learning and the NYSESLAT. The school secretary maintains all payroll information regarding professional development hours. There is a Professional Development binder kept in the principals office which contains all professional development agendas and sign in sheets. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental monthly meetings are scheduled and conducted by the ENL Certified Teacher to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in content areas. An agenda and signing sheets are kept by the ENL Teacher and in the main office. Written communication, including progress reports, meeting notices, brochures and fliers, are sent home to parents in English and translated versions in Spanish, Bengali, Haitian-Creole, and French-our home languages. Verbal communication is done in Spanish and French by our certified multilingual ENL Teacher. When Bengali, Haitian -Creole are needed in- house staff can do the interpretation and/ or we use the support of the Translation & Interpretation Unit of NYCDOE. The ENL Teacher is also the Language Access Coordinator and helps support staff and parent language needs by informing of the availability of language assistance services.There is an active Parents’ Association. Ms. Finn, the Principal has an open door policy and parents are welcome to visit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ell Parent involvement at PS/MS 042 includes parent workshops and community events held monthly for our entire school. ENL Certified teacher conducts monthly meetings in English/ Spanish as per Part 154. ELL parents attend many if not all of our PA meetings, Title I meetings and holiday functions held at the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patricia Finn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 042 R. Vernam School DBN: 27Q42 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Patricia Finn Title Principal Nancy O'Dwyer Assistant Principal Jackie Toney Maria Tejada Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kevin Morgan Parent Laurrise Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Heather Faciano C. Canitano Mary Barton Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 09/13/17 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q School Name: PS/MS042 Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Maria Tejada ENL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents complete a variety of forms when registering their children. If the student is a transfer from another NYC school, then a new HLIS is not completed. However, the school has a language preference form that parents do fill out even if they had already completed a HLIS in a different school. The home language is also noted in the HLIS located in the student's cumulative file, in ATS, and on the blue Emergency Contact card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Bengali 694 44 3 3 93.28 5.91 0.4 0.4 696 42 3 3 93.5 5.65 0.4 0.4 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none other Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families -Parent Notification Letters will be sent to parents in their home language regarding ENL. -Set 05-20, 2018 - All DOE materials are translated through the DOE regarding parent teacher conferences, testing dates, parents Bill of Rights, the discipline code among others. -Throughout the school year. plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. To communicate with non English speaking parents in their preferred languages- English-Spanish,French- Arabic- and to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children's educational optional and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  parents' capacity to improve their children's achievement our school will request the support of the Translation and Interpretation Unit . The Unit offers free translation services, connects schools with over-the- phone interpretation services and spearheads all system-wide language access efforts. Additionally, the multilingual certified ENL Teacher provides immediate oral interpretation in Spanish and French as well as other staff members. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Night September 2018 Parent-teacher conferences. Fall & Winter Terms interpretation service(s)? In-house support and Translation & Interpretation Unit and over the phone interpretation services. In-house support and Translation & Interpretation Unit and over the phone interpretation services. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  Monthly Parent Teacher Conferences Throughout the school year In-house support and Translation & Interpretation Unit and over the phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit, contact the language line and additionally in- house staff who speak languages of limited-English proficient families will provide support as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent coordinator, LAC and other key-school based personnel will attend periodic training on the language access requirements and on resources available to support such. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents that cannot communicate in English are made aware of their right to receive information in their own language by signage posted at schools main entrance, and in the main office. Brochures, flyers, and letters are shared with parents in their preferred language as stated in HILS forms. During Parent engagement events such as Parent Orientation Conferences, interpretation is provided in English, Spanish, French by the LAC-ENL teacher and additional translators are requested from the Translation and Interpretation Unit for other events such as PTA meetings, etc. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator will create a parent survey for our ENL parents by DOE Vendor for other languages this will be translated by the DOE Vendor for other languages. The coordinator will invite them in and assist in the completion of the survey. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93 
