2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q046 School Name: P.S. 046 ALLEY POND Principal: STAMO KARALAZARIDES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Alley Pond School 342600010046 School Number (DBN): 26Q046 Pre Kindergarten, Kindergarten, First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth 64-45 218 th Street, Bayside, New York 11364 (718) 423-8395 (718)423-8472 Phone Number: Fax: SKaralazarides2@schools.nyc.gov Stamo Karalazarides School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 26 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Stamo Karalazarides Amy Gruttadaro JiaeKim Stamo Karalazarides N/A N/A N/A District Information Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania St, Bayside, NY 11364 DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)631-6943 Phone Number: (718)631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North FSC Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North 4 th Floor, LIC, NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)391-8222 Phone Number: (718)391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Stamo Karalazarides Amy Gruttadaro JiaeKim Fran Kersch Jessica Ugalde Jane Kang Cindy Lau Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  QingYang Lin ShulinChu VincyMa Antoinette Monaco ElysePanlilio Alyssa Vukic Lisa Della Ratta Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission/Vision is that all students can learn and succeed. We support each child academically, emotionally and socially, giving students a well-rounded education, attainment of the Next Generation Learning Standards and prepare them to be innovative and productive citizens of the 21st Century. Our mission at PS 46Q is to support all students, including general education, special education, English as a New Language Learners and gifted students academically, socially and emotionally in order to achieve success and to become productive citizens. We set high expectations for all students and work collaboratively as a community 2018-19 CEP 9  including, teachers, paraprofessionals, administration and families, creating multiple opportunities for students to engage in enriching academic, technology and arts opportunities throughout the school year. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 46Q is a high performing school with a diverse population of approximately 600 students in grades Pre-K through 5th grade. We are a barrier free school, serving approximately 25% of our population as students with special needs. We work closely with our families, teachers and paraprofessionals to support students as individuals towards career and college readiness. Each student is given multiple opportunities to flourish in academics, technology, sports and arts subjects. We offer students instrumental and choral instruction, geek squad, drama club, team sports and have incorporated STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Math) throughout all of our grades and various programs. We have an initiative with grades 3-5 where each class receives science and math infused with technology in the STEM lab with the support of two teachers. This program fosters an understanding that technology is embedded across all subject areas and provides students with a deeper understanding of the connection of math and science. As a Teachers College Project School, we have strategic collaborations/ partnerships with other schools in the district such as 159Q and 173Q where our teachers observe one another's classrooms sharing best practices and planning next steps for our school community. Additionally, PS 46Q is partnered with NYU Langone, the Cerebral Palsy Foundation as an Ambassador School for The New York City Department of Education inclusion initiative, Just Say Hi. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 46Q also has approximately 10% English as a New Language Learners and former ENLs with approximately 6.6% ENLs and 7% former ENLs. Most of our English as a New Language Learners are from China and Korea. PS 46Q is a school with a vast amount of programs and diverse student needs. Our programs for students with special needs include at least one Integrated Co Teaching (ICT) class on each grade, 2 -12:1:1 classes of students with intellectual disabilities and 12:1 and 12:1:1 classes of students with learning disabilities or mixed disabilities. Additionally, we have three 8:1 ASD Horizon classes. Furthermore, we offer related services and resource room to identified students. Our special populations' needs are diverse within each program and each child's specific needs. Our ENLs struggle with English language acquisition and comprehension. Our students with disabilities' needs include but are not limited to language, physical, social and emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2013, PS 46Q was recognized by the United States Department of Education as a Blue Ribbon School due to our high test scores and the progress of our students with special needs. Over the past couple of years, we have seen an increase in all areas in our School Quality Snapshot shows that our students are making excellent progress in ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 10  2015-2016 Framework Scores 2016-2017 Framework Scores 2017-2018 Framework Scores 2015-2016 ELA 2016-2017 ELA 2017-2018 ELA 2015-2016 Math 2016-2017 Math 2017-2018 Math Collaborative Teachers Collaborative Teachers 4.39 4.49 Strong Family Community Ties 4.24 Strong Family Community Ties 4.36 Collaborative Teachers 4.65 Strong Family Community Ties 4.40 ELA ELA ELA Rigorous Instruction Rigorous Instruction 57.8% 65% 72.7% 4.19 4.32 Effective School Leadership Effective School Leadership Rigorous Instruction 4.29 Effective School Leadership Math Math Math 80.9 87% 84% 3.67 Trust 3.65 4.05 Trust 3.69 3.92 Trust 3.72 The area of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS 46Q continues to make the most progress from FY 2016 - FY 2018 is Collaborative Teachers. Our teacher teams work closely together to plan units of study, individual lessons and to analyze student data and needs. Additionally, in FY 2018, the School-wide Instructional Team analyzed the 2017 ELA data and identified the two skills that where 3-5 students struggled the most. The two skills were "Using text evidence to support your claim and Determining the central message/theme of a text." We created two school-wide six week cycles with a pre and post text. Each grade team analyzed individual and group needs based on the pre-assessment and planned multiple entry points, differentiated instruction and challenged students based on their individual abilities, needs and expectations. Students were assessed to see the growth in those two skill areas. We will continue to identify ELA and Math needs and plan cycles as an entire school community to meet this need during FY 2019. 2018-19 CEP 11  During the FY 2018-2019 our teachers will continue to study and analyze the effectiveness of their teaching practices by participating in collaborative rounds with their PS 46Q peers. Additionally, we will continue to have 3 cycles of collaborative rounds in conjunction with two other District 26 schools (PS 159Q and PS 173Q). Our teachers will study their practice improving on their teaching skills through the careful and strategic planning of collaborative rounds within our school building and in other New York City District 26 buildings. In addition to these collaborative rounds where we will focus on feedback, we will work with our feeder Middle School 74Q and two other community MS 74 feeder schools (205Q and 213Q) to sustain continuity across instruction in preparation for a smooth and effective transition into middle school. 2017-2018 Advance data shows an overall HEIDI score of 73.1% HE and 25.5% E. This is compared ot an overall HEIDI score of approximately 70% HE, 30% E and 1% D in 2016-2017. A closer look at Domain 3 reveals a score of 3.48/4.0 in 3b Question and Discussion Techniques. Although there has been an increase in the amount of Effective and Highly Effective Ratings since the beginning of the year and the prior year, 3b Question and Discussion Techniques continues to be the area where most teachers continue to need support. Advance data also shows 3d Assessment in Instruction as an area in need of support when compared to overall data with a score of 3.55/4.0. Upon further analysis of low inference notes, it is evident that providing teachers further support in the area of student feedback is crucial in lifting the work of 3d in the classrooms. In an effort to deepen the work around feedback, we are continuing to build students' independence and empower them with the ability to give themselves and their peers actionable feedback by having students give one another examples and modeling next steps for each other. Furthermore, another area of focus for the coming school year is to strengthen family and community ties. 2018's Framework for Great Schools data continually shows a steady growth from 2016 to 2018. In FY 2018, data shows a score of 4.40 which is an increase from FY 2017's score of 4.36 which was already increased from a 4.24 score in FY 2016. Though we increased our score, it is imperative that we continue to strengthen and to foster parents' understanding of curriculum, collaboration in school events, and the sharing of student work throughout the year. We will continue to open our classroom doors to families to see the great work of our students in areas such as EI (Emotional Intelligence), reading, writing, math, and STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Math). Additionally, each grade is assigned to a monthly PTA meeting where they will share student work and or plan activities for families with their children thus increasing both parental and teacher participation during PTA meetings. Another focus for the 2018-2019 school year is the continued implementation and the deepening of Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop across all grades and special education programs. A new area of professional development that we are deepening for 2018-2019 is our EI (Emotional Intelligence) training. All of our focuses will be embedded in every aspect of the Framework for Great Schools- Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family and Community Ties with a deep emphasis on building trust between teachers, parents and administration. During FY 2017-2018 as a school community we continued building the independence of all of our students. We focused on our Special Needs community and provided students with additional resources such as learning tools that they could use to improve their work, support their needs and empower themselves to produce their best work. During FY 2018-2019, we will continue to provide opportunities for all of our students including Special Needs and English as a New Language Learners with the ability to self assess their work, decide their next steps as learners and what resources they need to complete their tasks. Additionally, we will grow their ability to become resources for one another. They will give each other targeted feedback based on a standards based rubric or checklist and provide their peers with examples through modeling or explanation. Building students' self and peer awareness and the ability to make effective educational decisions for themselves and others will better enable them to become innovative, forward thinking 21st century citizens. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q046 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 556 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 86 82 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 14 22 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 51.0% % Attendance Rate 43.7% % Reduced Lunch 10.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 15.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.5 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 77 78 31 95.9% 7.0% 23.4% 4.5% 62.8% 3.4% 2 0% 8.5 84.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall 2017-2018 Advance data indicates that Domain 3 - Instruction is the area in most need of strengthening. In Domain 3, teachers received an overall score of 3.58/4.0. A closer look at 3c Engagement reveals an overall score of 3.72/4.0. This shows a .09% increase from the previous school year. In an effort to continually raise student engagement by providing students with materials and resources to support the learning goals and intellectual engagement, teachers will utilize technology authentically to drive and support student engagement during instruction. Further analysis of teachers' observations revealed the need to intellectually engage students in challenging content through well designed tasks. In an effort to increase students' thinking, engaging them in standards based tasks that require the implementation of technology to drive their explanations will deepen their abilities to initiate learning tasks and to make their thoughts and knowledge visible. During the 2017-2018 school year, teacher teams utilized technology throughout various tasks including daily writing through the use Google Docs where students commented on one another's work in order to support each other in reaching their best personal potential. In the lower grades technology was used as a means to publish work. In the coming school year, we are planning on increasing the use of Google Docs down in 3rd grade. Additionally, we are asking teachers to plan their infusion of technology in a more continuous basis to support student work. While our school has shown an increase in ELA and Math over the last few years, we did not meet our Annual Year's Progress according to our New York State Report Card because two of our subgroups, Caucasian and students with disabilities did not make the 95% participation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students including English as a New Language Learners and Students With Disabilities will produce a minimum of two standards based technology artifacts across core subject areas such as reading, writing, math, science and/or social studies as measured by students attaining a minimum of one computer science based concepts predetermined by their grade. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research based instructional programs, professional development, and or systems and structures needed to impact change. ● Planning of technology embedded lessons targeting standards based instruction across subject areas such as reading, writing, math, science and social studies Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 Teachers, cluster teachers and Admin. . ● Teacher team collaboration on standards based lessons infusing technology ● Ongoing professional development and professional learning throughout the school year ● School-wide Instructional Team will meet bimonthly and work to analyze and discuss each grade's plan to infuse technology to drive instruction and ensure it's alignment to District 26 STEM Curriculum  Administration will observe classrooms and look for integration of technology  Classroom teachers will give teacher leaders (Instructional Team members on their grade) examples of student work and lesson plans to share and analyze with administration  Teacher Teams will utilize District 26 Technology Framework to plan technology infused units of study  Math and Science teachers will plan science units of study in grades 3, 4, and 5 infusing Math and Technology, ensuring the connection of the three subject areas while also embedding Engineering when appropriate in an effort to drive STEM (Science, 2018-19 CEP 15  Technology, Engineering and Math) instruction for our students  A minimum of one text based artifact will be produced by December, 2018 and a second one will be produced by May, 2019 Strategies and interventions for English as a New Language Learners: ● Great Leaps reading fluency ● Wilson Reading ● Guided Reading ● Small group instruction ● Push in ESL Strategies and Interventions for Students with Disabilities: ● Great Leaps reading fluency ● Wilson Reading ● Guided Reading ● Small group instruction ● Push in related services ● Push in/pull out RTI ● UDL (Universal Design for Learning) strategies Supporting Families: ● Curriculum information on classroom websites ● Monthly meetings with administration (coffee with the principal) ● Standards based curriculum workshops and meetings ● Class websites with monthly standards based units of study in reading and writing, homework expectations, writing celebration information ● Parent workshops in leveled reading, standards based expectations, the use of technology in the classroom, supporting children at home Pre K-5 Teachers, ENL Teachers 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 Teachers, ENL Teachers, IEP Teachers, Speech Teachers, cluster teachers and Admin. Pre K-5 SWDs 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers, Admin,paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, speech teachers 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers, cluster teachers, Admin., parent coordinator Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs 2018-19 CEP 16  ● Parents will be invited in to see the technology infused projects shared in their children's class ● STEAM Share Event in May 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host workshops during Tuesday's Parent Engagement Time. Each teacher team will host a minimum of two workshops in standards based ELA and/or Math. Additionally, there will be 5 Fridays throughout the school year where families will be invited into the classrooms to see rigorous standards based instruction including STEM, Math, Reading, Writing and the use of Thinking Maps to drive instruction. Key personnel include classroom teachers, administration and the parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Framework for Teaching rubrics, Advance MOTP data, Quality Review Indicators, EnVision Math Series, STEM training, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of study, Teachers College staff developers, Teachers College Reading and Writing calendar days, TC Assessment Pro, leveled libraries, Rosetta Stone language learning program, Smart Boards, desk tops, Ipads, Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps Reading Fluency kits, K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, cluster teachers, assistant principal, principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% Teacher Teams will have a clear plan for infusing technology in a standards based reading, writing, math, science or social studies task as measured by teachers having planned a minimum of one technology based task completed and having predetermined the one computer science concept that will be covered for the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher teams' technology task plans and student technology work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our 2016-2017 Framework Data Compared to 2015-2016: 2015-2016 ELA 2016-2017 ELA 2017-2018 ELA 2015-2016 Math 2016-2017 Math 2017-2018 Math ELA ELA 57.8% 65% ELA 72.7 Math Math Math 80.9 87% 84% 2015-2016 Framework Scores 2016-2017 Framework Scores 2017-2018 Framework Scores Collaborative Teachers Collaborative Teachers Collaborative Teachers 4.39 4.49 4.65 Strong Family Community Ties 4.24 Strong Family Community Ties 4.36 Strong Family Community Ties 4.40 Rigorous Instruction Rigorous Instruction 4.19 4.32 Effective School Leadership Effective School Leadership 3.67 Trust 3.65 4.05 Trust 3.69 Rigorous Instruction 4.29 Efffective School Leadership 3.92 Trust 2018-19 CEP 19  3.72 Over the past few years, we have seen an steady increase in our ELA scores as a result of strong teacher team pedagogy using the methodologies of the Teachers College Reading and Writing workshop model. In math, though we saw a 3% decrease in 2018 compred to 2017, overall, we have a 3% increase over the last three years. In the Framework for Great Schools are data remains consistent and our Collaborative Teachers and Strong Community Ties have shown steady increases over the last few years. Our teachers are working collaboratively to plan instruction and analyze student work through systems which include but are not limited to common preps, collaborative rounds, teacher team professional development and vertical team planning. In Strong Community Ties, our families have seen an ample increase in teacher and administration led workshops which include classroom visitation of instruction. Additionally, family members have supported our community in bringing in their knowledge and designing activities for students through brown bag lunches and for families during our PTA meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students including English as a New Language Learners and Special Needs students will engage in a minimum of three EI (Emotional Intelligence) activities where they will identify their feelings using proper vocabulary and will track their moods daily through the use of a mood meter and a monthly calendar as measured by a minimum increase of 5% more days in the green and/or yellow moods on the mood meter. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Pre K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, IEP teacher, paraprofessionals, speech teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, assistant principal, guidance counselor, social worker  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Collaboration with grade team peers and administration during professional learning time on Mondays and during common preps with a minimum of 30 hours of PD incorporating best practices in Emotional Intelligence training ● Collaborative planning and incorporating mood meter throughout the school day as a reference for students to use to self regulate feelings and support one another in the classroom ● Creating support systems and scaffolds as per individual student needs on a daily basis through the use of the mood meter - Just Say Hi Social Studies Curriculum Supplement - Collaboration of students, teachers and administration as part of the Just Say Hi Inclusion Initiative  Administration will observe EI activities during the  school day during daily visits to classrooms and Advance teacher observations School-wide Instructional Team members analyze validity of EI work and plan EI activities with individual Teacher Teams (grade, cluster and ENL)  Teacher Teams rotate the planning and implementation of one EI Monday professional learning PD to staff members  Teacher Teams plan EI lessons embedded in curriculum across all subject areas including but not limited to reading, writing and math  Teacher Teams plan and administer first EI lesson in September, 2018  Teacher Teams plan and implement the second EI activity by January, 2019 and the final one by May, 2019 2018-19 CEP 21  Teachers will plan to incorporate the Just Say Hi inclusion curriculum with the daily EI work and lessons Supporting Families: ● EI information on classroom websites 9/18-6/19 Teachers, parents, parent coordinator, students ● EI meetings with administration (coffee with the principal, PTA and parent engagement time) ● Yoga class with parents and children during a PTA meeting Strategies and Interventions for English as a New Language Learners: ENL teachers, Pre K-5 teachers, cluster teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, representative from the NYC Department of Mental Health and Hygiene Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, representative from NYC Department of Mental Health and Hygiene ● Support charts ● Small group instruction ● Mood Meter ● Formulating and answering questions in their native language ● Translation tools such as Google translate, dictionaries and thesauruses ● Pictorial representations and clues Strategies and Interventions for Students with Disabilities: ● Individual supports (mood meters, behavioral charts) ● Support charts with conversation tools and habits ● Small group instruction ● Push in related services ● Mood meter ● UDL (Universal Design for Learning) strategies 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers including Horizon teachers, ACE program teachers Principal, assistant principal, IEP teacher, Horizon coach, representative from NYC Department of Mental Health and Hygiene How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 22  Families will be invited to yoga class for parents and children, EI trainings during PTA meetings, Coffee with the Principal and parent engagement time on Tuesdays. EI information will be available on the school website and individual parent meetings for students requiring further EI support will be given on an as needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Framework for Teaching rubrics, Advance MOTP data, Smart Boards, desk tops, IPads, mood meters, Yale EI online resources, K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, speech teachers, representative from NYC Department of Mental Health and Hygiene, Horizon coach, assistant principal, principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teacher teams will have implemented a minimum of one EI activity and students will have an increase of 2% days in the green and/or yellow from November to January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Planning of a minimum of three EI activities and artifacts produced through the activities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2014-2015 Quality Review indicates a proficient rating and a focus in 1.2 of Instructional Core. Our FY 2018 Framework for Great Schools data shows an increase of .04% in the area of Trust with a score of 3.72 compared to a 3.69 the previous year. Teachers will work collaboratively, sharing best practices with one another in an effort to increase cohesive planning and continued trust throughout the building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all K-5 teachers will participate in collaborative rounds with a focus on 3b Question and Discussion Techniques and 3d Assessment in Instruction in Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching that will inform and improve their ability to provide students with targeted instruction including multiple entry points and high level thinking for all learners including English as a New Language Learners and Students with Disabilities as evidenced by 97% of teachers receiving either an Effective or Highly Effective rating in domains 3b and 3c of their Advance Measure of Teaching Practice. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs 9/18-6/19 Teachers, assistant principal, IEP Teachers Speech Teachers, ENL Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teacher teams will work collaboratively to identify student needs and plan targeted standards based instruction ● Observation of student work ● Analysis of student data ● Lesson study ● Planning of scaffolded, enrichment, and open ended instruction to support and challenge students at their individual ability and levels of need Schoolwide Instructional Team will discuss and identify expectations in components 3b Questions and Discussions Techniques & 3c Student Engagement Schoolwide instructional Team will observe classrooms across all programs including Students With Disabilities and English as a New Language Learners and will identify and discuss best practices, trends and needs in components 3b and 3c Schoolwide Instructional Team will collaborate with teachers to address individual, gradewide, and schoolwide needs in components 3b and 3c Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities: Pre K-5 SWDs 9/18-6/19 ● Targeted instruction based in individual students’ needs and learning styles ● Planning and implementation of multiple entry points for all lessons and subjects ● Use of visual representations and scaffolds ● Push in/pull out related service instruction ● Push in/pull out resource room instruction Pre K-5 Teachers, cluster teachers admin, IEP Teacher, Speech Teacher and ENL Teachers 2018-19 CEP 25 Strategies to address the needs of English Language Learners Pre K-5 ENLs 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, cluster teachers, RTI, resource room and ENL Teachers ● Push in/pull out ESL services ● Targeted ESL instruction ● Visual and kinetic scaffolds ● Modeling ● Discussions Supporting Families: ● Curriculum information on classroom websites ● Monthly meetings with administration (coffee with the principal) ● Monthly CCLS curriculum workshops and meetings Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, cluster teachers, Admin., parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will invite parents to workshops throughout the school year where they will share standards based information in their children's current grade and units of study that students are working on. Additionally, the principal will invite parents to a workshop followed by visits to classrooms with specific focuses such as but not limited to STEM, Reading, Writing, Math and the use of Thinking Maps to drive instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Framework for Teaching rubrics, Advance MOTP data, Quality Review Indicators, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of study, Teachers College staff developers, Teachers College Reading and Writing calendar days, TC Assessment Pro, leveled libraries, EnVision Math series and online program, Smart Boards, desk tops, IPads, Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps Reading Fluency kits, K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, assistant principal, principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  By February 2018, teachers will have planned and implemented 2 collaborative rounds and teacher questioning and discussion techniques MOTP ratings will show that 96% of teachers receive an HE or E in 3b and 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our FY 2018 Framework for Great Schools data indicates steady growth in the area of trust from 2016-2018. In FY 2016, the score was 3.65. In 2017, the score was 3.69 and the 2018 score is 3.72. Though, we have seen steady growth in this area, it is imperative that we continue to improve trust in our building among the teachers with each other and with the administration. We began participating in collaborative rounds as a community in FY2016 and have seen a continual increase in trust in our building. Last year, we began collaborative rounds with two other schools as well (178Q and 159Q). We will continue growing this practice and effectively using it to create cohesion for our students and build trust among the members of the building in an effort to be a most effective and collaborative team for our students. 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools data shows a decrease of terachers trusting one another with 76% trusting each other in 2016-17 and 71% trusting each other in 2017-2018. This 5% decrease shows the area of trust as a continued priority for the upcoming school year 2018-2019. Our work with collaborative rounds in 2017-2018 has impacted our teachers ability to infuse opportunities for students to formulate questions and to assess their work during lessons across all subject areas as evidenced by a .09% increase in 3b Question and Discussion Techniques. The areas where we are in need of further intervention and as a school team is 3d Assessment as we dropped .13% from the previous year 2016-2017. Upon closer analysis of this data, our Instructional Team which includes our Principal and Assistant Principal realized that as a community, we increased our assessment expectations and demands in Domain 3d which impacted our Advance data. 2014-2015 QR Data reveals a Well Developed in Engaging in Structured Professional Collaborations in Teams Using an Inquiry Approach that Promotes Shared Leadership and Focuses on Improved Student Learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will establish and support a system that allows 100% of teachers to participate in collaborative rounds, sharing best practices and planning cohesively resulting in at least a 10% increase of teachers trusting each other on the 2018-2019 NYC DOE Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Teachers will collaboratively plan and implement standards based instruction using the methodologies of Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop, and EnVision Math ● Teachers will plan targeted instruction with multiple entry points Pre K-5 students including SWDs and ENLs 9/18-6/19 Teachers, Admin., IEP Teacher, Speech Teachers and ENL Teachers ● Teachers will analyze student work and collaborate on next steps, best practices, differentiated instruction, providing open ended and enrichment opportunities for students ● Teachers will visit each other’s classrooms and identify student needs and next steps School-wide Instructional Team will discuss and identify expectations in components 3b Questions and Discussions Techniques and 3d Assessment In Instruction School-wide Instructional Team will observe classrooms across all programs including Students With Disabilities and English as a New Language Learners and will identify and discuss best practices, trends, and needs in components 3b and 3d School-wide Instructional Team will collaborate with teachers to address individual, grade-wide, and school-wide needs in components 3b and 3d Grade-wide Teams will plan and implement collaborative rounds in component 3b and 3d School leaders will support teachers by giving them planning time to identify classrooms and establish expectations for collaborative rounds School leaders will meet with grade team to discuss findings, best practices and next steps after each collaborative round 2018-19 CEP 29 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities: Pre K-5 SWDs 9/18-6/19 ● Targeted standards based instruction based in individual students’ needs and learning styles ● Planning and implementation of multiple entry points for all lessons and subjects ● Use of visual representations and scaffolds ● Observation and analysis of student work ● Analysis targeted students’ of acquisition of lesson’s objective Strategies to address the needs of English Language Learners Pre K-5 ENLs 9/18-6/19 ● Push in ENL services ● Targeted ENL instruction ● Visual and kinetic scaffolds ● Modeling Teachers, IEP Teacher, Speech Teacher and ENL Teachers Teachers, ENL teachers, Admin., IEP Teacher, Speech Teachers, and ENL Teachers ● Planning of DOK level III, IV questions for ENLs ● Observation and analysis of English Language Acquisition Supporting Families: ● Curriculum information on classroom websites ● Monthly meetings with administration (coffee with the principal) Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs ● Monthly standards based curriculum workshops and meetings 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to five school visits throughout the school year where they will visit classrooms to see specific areas of instruction including STEM, Reading, Writing, Math, and the use of Thinking Maps to drive instruction. Teacher teams will plan a minimum of two workshops for their parents specific to their current grades'/students' needs and curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 30  The Framework for Teaching rubrics, Advance Measurement of Teacher Practice (MOTP) data, Quality Review Indicators, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of study, Teachers College staff developers, Teachers College Reading and Writing calendar days, TC Assessment Pro, leveled libraries, Smart Boards, desk tops, IPads, Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps Reading Fluency kits, K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, speech teachers, assistant principal, principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end January 2019, 75% of teachers will have participated in 2 collaborative rounds, observing student work, analyzing student data and creating targeted instruction for identified students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Framework for Great Schools Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools data shows: 96% of parents say that the school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them. 97% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. 93% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs. PTA meeting and parent workshops attendance data from the 2017-2018 school year shows little to no difference from teh 2016-2017 school year. For the upcoming school year, 2018-2019, we will give parents workshop and informational opportunities during monthly evening PTA meetings on areas pre determined with the families of our School Leadership Team who surveyed other parents and supported our SLTs initiative to create meaningful workshops and agendas for families. These include activities to be done with their children such as yoga, paint night and martial arts. Other sessions that are more informational and not activity based will also be planned such as Social Emotional training for parents/guardians. 2014-2015 QR Data shows a Well Developed in Establish a Culture for Learning that Communicates High Expectations to Staff, Students and Families and Provides Support to achieve those Expectations Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see an increase of 10% attendance during monthly PTA meetings as we will plan workshops and informational sessions in collaboration with the administration, the PTA and our parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 32 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 K-5 teachers, cluster teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal Pre K-5 students including SWDs, and ENLs and their families Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Each teacher will create a website with information on their monthly units of study. Classroom teachers will identify units of study by subject area- reading, writing, math, science and social studies. Other information relayed on websites: ● Daily homework expectations ● Class scheduled enrichment trips ● Class celebrations of student work including 3 writing celebrations that families will be invited to throughout the school year- narrative, informational and persuasive/opinion ● Musical Theater (K-5), Ballroom dance (5 th grade) performance dates and celebrations ● Concert dates and performances ● Science and Art fair information ● Star student dates and information ● Activities throughout the school year such as class trips ● Information on supporting your child at home School website with pertinent dates, information on various programs and activities throughout the school year Teacher Teams work collaboratively during Parent Engagement time to update class websites Parent coordinator, SLT parent members and administration will seek input from families about parental needs for monthly PTA meeting workshops and informational sessions 2018-19 CEP 33  Strategies to address Students with Special Needs: ● Differentiated and/or open ended homework will be posted, giving students the opportunity to perform at individual ability levels and to target individual student needs ● Information to families for supporting their children at home will include ways to help struggling students 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 SWDs and their families Strategies to address the needs of English Language Learners Pre K-5 ENLs 9/18-6/19 ● Homework assignments will include work for ENLs and struggling students and their families K-5 Teachers, cluster teachers, IEP teacher, related service providers, principal, assistant principal K-5 teachers, cluster teachers, ENL teachers, principal, assistant principal 9/18-6/19 Pre K-5 teachers, principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator Pre K-5 students including ENLs and SWDs and their families ● Parent information on English as a Second Language workshops will be posted ● Supports for ENLs will be given for families to help their children at home ● Translators (bilingual paraprofessionals) will be available to assist students and families with translation services throughout the year Supporting Families: ● Curriculum information on classroom websites ● Monthly meetings with administration (coffee with the principal) ● Monthly standards based curriculum workshops and meetings ● Websites will be referenced during parent meetings and workshops including monthly Coffee with the Principals meeting ● Email blasts informing parents of school events and pertinent information ● Translators (bilingual paraprofessionals) will be available for all meetings including PTC (Parent Teacher Conferences), workshops, and monthly coffee with the principal ● Musical theater residency and winter and spring concert performances will be planned throughout the school- year, giving families multiple opportunities to come see their children showcase their work and their talents ● Parent volunteers will work with teachers and students on the planning and implementation of our annual Lunar New Year celebration 2018-19 CEP 34  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Framework for Teaching rubrics, Advance MOTP data, Quality Review Indicators, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of study, Teachers College staff developers, Teachers College Reading and Writing calendar days, Teachers College family day, TC Assessment Pro, leveled libraries, Smart Boards, desk tops, IPads, Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps Reading Fluency kits, K-5 teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP teacher, speech teachers, assistant principal, principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will have had three workshops for families during PTA meetings an a set plan in place for the remaining four meetings. All meetings and offerings to parents will be done in a collaborative manner with families as our goal is to address their needs and bring them informational sessions and activities that they are most interested in. By this point, we should see a 10% sustained and steady increase in attendance during PTA meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated readings, guided reading, text deconstruction, shared reading, interactive writing, Thinking Maps, student discussions around high level questions, reading fluency Guided math, use of manipulatives, Thinking Maps, breaking down of word problems, isolating pertinent information in a word problem, identifying question asked, repeated teaching practice of skills and strategies, scaffolding math facts Review of information and concepts Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 and low Level 2 students as per 2018NYS ELA Scores Level 1 readers as per TCRWP independent reading levels Level 1 and low Level 2 students as per 2018NYS Math Scores Level 1 students as per EnVision and Exemplar Math tasks Level 1 and low level 2 students as per 2018NYS Science Test Level 1 students as per science experiments and work portfolios and assessments Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group or one on one During the school day Title III after-school program Small group or one on one During the school day Title III after-school program Small group and one on one During the school day Title III after-school program 2018-19 CEP 36 Small group and one on one During the school day Small group or one to one Title III after-school program During the school day Title III after-school program Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Review of information and concepts IEPTeacher, Speech, social workers, guidance counselor, school psychologist, methods and resources teacher, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals (Great Leaps 1:1 instruction) Level 1 and low level 2 students as per social studies work portfolios and assessments Level 1 and low Level 2 students as per 2018NYS ELA and Math Test Scores Level 1 readers as per TCRWP independent reading levels Level 1 students as per EnVision Math work and assessments and Exemplars Tasks 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 41  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 46Q, The Alley Pond School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 46Q, The Alley Pond School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 45  PS 46Q, The Alley Pond School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the lementary and Secondary Education Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theEvery Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 47  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 48  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The PS 46Q Title III program is open to all English Language Learners in grades 2-5 in order to help them meet their grade level standards and New Language Arts Learning Progressions for English as a New Language and English Language Arts. Identified students will be able to participate in an after school program that will be held two afternoons per week, for one hour each day, using English as the only language of instruction. The program will begin on October 3, 2018 and run until June 20, 2019 and will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20-3:20 pm. All mandated current ELLs in grades 2-5 have been invited to participate. All parents of ELLs in grades 2-5 are notified and invited to the Title III program through a letter in parents' preferred languages. We utilize the NYC Translation Unit in order to translate all letters home to parents to ensure they are understanding the messages that are sent home to them. All parents of ELLs in grades 2-5 received written invitations (in English and their home language) to participate in the Title III after school program with return tear-off slips to monitor and keep record of the students that are interested. All parent invitation tear off slips are kept on record in a file folder for the program. All parent invitation letters in various languages and the list of program dates are kept on file in the same folder. Attendance is taken each class in order to have records of student attendance. If a child is frequently absent for the after school program, the parent is notified with a translator available. Students will be grouped according to proficiency and grade levels in order to maximize the effectiveness of the instruction. Students will be instructed by two licensed ENL teachers using scaffolding techniques such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognitive development, oral language, text deconstructing and text representation. The teachers will also use additional strategies in order to facilitate language acquisition such as predictable and consistent classroom routines, aided by diagrams, Thinking Maps, lists, and easy to read text. There will be an emphasis on vocabulary development on Tier 1, Tier 2 and Tier 3 words by identifying and clarifying difficult words and passages within texts in order to facilitate comprehension. Teachers will incorporate STEAM language activities into the afterschool program by using "Engineering is Elementary" program as a supplemental curriculum. Students will also be given extra practice in reading words, sentences and stories in order to build fluency. Workshop model teaching will be implemented in order to support our Title III children's English language acquisition and help them enhance their English skills in listening, speaking reading and writing. The materials purchased are solely for Title III after school instruction. These materials will not be used for daily instruction during the school day, they are completely distinct and supplemental from materials used during the regular school hours. The language games and reading materials such as Finish Line: New York ELLs, will only be used in the Title III program for extra English support. We scaffold our materials in order to fit the needs of all English language learners and we differentiate for students of all proficiency levels. For newcomer ELLs, home language support is offered through the use of peer translations and bilingual books. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Approximately 10% of our students are English Language Learners. Over the past several years, we have had an influx of students and because of that, have had an increase of English as a New Language Learners. All of our classroom and cluster teachers are working with English as a New Language Learners throughout the school day. In order to provide our ENLs with proper differentiation which is appropriate to their needs as English as a New Language Learners, we must provide our teachers with ENL techniques and methodologies. Our two Title III ENL teachers will provide professional development to all teachers and paraprofessionals during the months of November and February. These meetings will take place during the staff's professional Learning time, giving our educators a thorough understanding of their ENLs needs in an effective and timely manner. There will be two professional development days in January, 2019 and two in March, 2019 with a total of 4 days. Each professional development training will take place from 2:20-3:40 pm with the Title III teachers remaining until 3:40 in order to address individual and grade-wide questions or needs. The teachers and paraprofessionals will be split up by grade (K-2 and 3-5). This will provide teachers with a more focused approach to support their English as a New Language Learners in academic progression and in meeting the grade level standards and expectations. The ENL teachers will explain and model skills and strategies they use to support their students in mastering the English language as well as their grade level standards. The reason for ongoing professional development for teachers of ELLs is to aide them with strategies and support that is helpful when teaching ELLs. Topics to be covered are teaching the importance of Social and Emotional Health to our ELLs, Supporting ELLs with Teacher's College Reading and Writing curriculum and "planning instruction around Danielson's Framework for Teaching-3b Questions and Discussion Techniques with multiple entry points for English Language Learners." They will review ENL methodologies used during both the Title III program and our regular ENL program. The Title III teachers will meet with the assistant principal for two afternoons in January, two afternoons in February and two afternoons in March, totaling 15 hours in order to organize professional learning materials, analyze NYSESLAT data, assess individual and school-wide needs for teaching and supporting English as a New Language Learners, creating effective and useful professional development for the January, 2019 and March, 2019 professional learning dates. The administration of the professional development to the paraprofessionals and teachers will total 6 hours. In addition to providing professional development in January, 2019 and March, 2019, our two Title III ELL teachers will receive training throughout the 2018/2019 school year on the CCLS, the Danielson Framework with a strong emphasis on 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques, problem solving and writing workshop. The trainings will be administered by the PS 46Q administration during the teachers' contractual professional learning time. The Title III teachers are expected to use the methodologies and strategies learned during their PL time with their Title III classes. Furthermore, our Title III teachers will attend ENL trainings and meetings administered throughout the 2018/2019 school year through our district; as well as two additional Teachers College Reading and Writing Professional Development days and math professional learning through the district and during our Monday Professional Learning time throughout the 2018/2019 school year. They will be meeting weekly to plan curriculum for our Title III 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development program. The various PD opportunities that are offered to our ENL teachers as well as classroom and cluster teachers will help them to learn more about ELLs and successful strategies to teach and scaffold for English language learners in their classrooms. ELLs need scaffolded support in order to slowly understand and progress forward in their language development. By differentiating tasks for ELLs, they will be able to accomplish tasks at their own pace and feel confident while doing so. This has such a positive impact on ELLs and how they succeed in school. They must be given tasks that they are able to accomplish and it is usually a little bit at a time. As classroom teachers learn these strategies that support ELLs in the classroom during reading, writing, and across all content areas, ELL continue to strengthen their skills and begin improving tremendously and making considerable gains. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III teachers will meet with parents and contact them as necessary throughout the school year during their parent engagement time each week. Our parent coordinator will administer workshops for parents throughout the school year. Translators will be present to assist parents. On February 1st, our Title III parents will be invited to attend and participate in our Lunar New Year celebration. They will also be invited to share their customs, traditions and cultural food during International Day on March 1st. We will also offer our ENL students additional test taking strategies for the New York State ELA and Math test for seven weeks, beginning February 6th and ending on March 27th. In March, we will have a meeting for parents, giving them information about the NYSESLAT tests. In April and June of 2019, we will give our parents information on spring and summer activities that they can plan and do with their families, keeping their minds and bodies active during the beautiful warm weather. Activities will include NYC museums such as the NY Hall of Science and the Museum of Natural History. Outdoor activities will feature the Bronx Zoo, and the NY Botanical Gardens. During all parent workshops we will have translators present in order to support our non-English speaking parents. Additionally, Title III parents/guardians will be invited to a culminating celebration during the last week of May where their children will share traditions from from their native countries including but not limited to clothing, food, literature and music. During the week before, the Title III students will interview one family member where they will ask questions about their native country and why they came to the United States. They will present the information to their Title III class in oral and/written form. This activity will lead into the culminating celebration during the last week of the program. Parents/guardians will be notified in writing of the parent engagement activities. The letter to parents will be translated in the native language(s) of the identified parents/guardians who require translation services. When necessary, bilingual staff members will contact parents/guardians via telephone in order to ensure understanding of the cultural event. All parent workshops are given based on input from the families and in conjuction with our School Leadership Team and our Parent Teacher Association. During our SLT, we analyze the 2018-19 CEP 53 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities attendance during meetings and family events and we survey families about their needs for meetings, workshops and family events during PTA meetings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 2 teachers x 61 sessions x 1.5 hours x $60.65= $11,098.95 2 teachers x 7 sessions x 1 hours x $60.65 (Test Prep) = $849.10 Total= $11,948.05 Purchased services  High quality staff Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 ELL Licensed Teachers will work a total of 3 hours each week from October to May. Also, 1 additional hour per week will be administered for grades, 3, 4, 5, in preparation and in support of the NYS Tests from February until March. The total amount of hours for our after school Title III programs is 171 hours. 2 ELL Licensed Teachers will administer Testing Strategies for our Title III students in grades 3-5 beginning February 6th and ending March 27th. The program will take place for seven weeks with a total of 14 hours. and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $417.95 will be allocated to purchase interactive language games, technology, and materials. We will implement games to help students build and decode words, strengthen vocabulary, and formulate fluent sentences. N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Alley Pond School Borough Queens School Number 046 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stamo Karalazarides Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leonard Galit/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Waring/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Zipora Cysner/ ENL Related-Service Provider Sonia Chojar/ SETSS/ ENL Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Stephanie Famoso Coach N/A School Counselor Nicole Myers Parent Elaine Ngai Parent Coordinator Donna Kodjapashis Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Heather Rodriguez/ RtI C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 557 Total number of ELLs 58 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.41% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the following assessment tools at PS 46Q: NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Spanish LAB, MOSL Tasks, TCRWP (Reading Levels, Spelling Inventory, On-Demand Writing Tasks), Great Leaps, Teacher created Assessments, Math Exemplars, and Envision Math Diagnostic and Placement Tests.) We also use the NYS ELA, NYS Math, and NYS Science exams to assess student learning.Newly arrived ELLs have difficulty reading English due to their lack of English proficiency as well as the difference between our written language and theirs. Based on TCRWP reading levels, we use the Fountas and Pinnell leveled books to address all levels of readers. Most of our ELLs are from China which has a completely different alphabet/writing system than the English language. In math, our ELLs tend to do better but struggle with word problems for the same reason. Data shows our ELLs in all grades need support in reading and writing. This data will drive instruction. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The goal of formative assessment is for us to monitor student learning and to provide continuous feedback that we can use to improve learning. Through these formative assessments we can identify strengths and weaknesses and target areas that need support. In order to support this effort of analyzing student assessments, ESL teachers meet with classroom teachers to discuss NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. The scores are analyzed with classroom teachers and we develop plans and strategies together in order to set language goals for our ELLs. The NYSITELL is administered based on Home Language Surveys and student/parent interviews. The NYSESLAT is given every April/May to all current ELLs in the school during the testing administration window. The Spanish Lab is also administered after the NYSITELL only to ELLs whose Home Language is Spanish if they do not test proficient on the NYSITELL. TCRWP reading levels, spelling inventory, and on demand writing tasks are administered multiple times throughout the school year to determine growth and areas where support is needed. Students are grouped according to scores in order to maximize instruction. Weekly meetings are scheduled during common preps to articulate with classroom teachers what progress has been made and what supports are needed. We develop plans and strategies and then evaluate and modify based on student needs. Weekly grade team meetings are set to address struggling learners. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Each year administration as well as our ENL teachers review the data of our ELLs. Each grade uses the NYC Performance Tasks in order to support planning and guide instruction. We will be using the NYC ELL periodic assessments in the beginning and end of the school year. We look for patterns and trends that may need to be addressed. We develop and follow programs that meet the needs of our students, such as reading comprehension, fluency, listening strategies, note taking, speaking and social skills, as well as provide detailed differentiated instruction for all students to be able to complete work and be challenged. This allows us to differentiate in order to meet each child's individual needs. We collaborate with classroom teachers and meet with network support specialists in an effort to ensure that each student is receiving the highest level of education in order to meet or exceed the Common Core Standards. Success is measured as per our ELLs gains on both formal and informal assessments. We also monitor student growth by developing student portfolios in ENL to showcase their work samples and progress. Year after year, we are noting our ELLs progress on their NYSESLAT. In addition, many of our ELLs attain English language proficiency and score high on all NYSED tests. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ELL coordinator runs the EDAT tool in order to look for trends to share with the Principal, the AP, classroom teachers, and inquiry team members. Based on the EDAT information, we create a plan for struggling learners in order to place them appropriately in RtI, Great Leaps, Wilson Reading Intervention, Reading Recovery, or AIS. We offer Title III ELL after school support to all current ELLs in grades 2-5 as an extra support to acquire language. We give PD to teachers and identify problems of practice with possible solutions. We give tools to students to build independence based upon data. Once end of the school year NYSESLAT score reports are released, we analyze all data for each student to recognize strengths and weaknesses across all four modalities of the English language: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. These results are shared with administration, teachers, and parents. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We identify ELLs who are not making academic progress at expected rates. Beyond screening and identification for ENL services, the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in below benchmark area. We offer RtI, Great Leaps, Wilson Reading Intervention, Reading Recovery, and AIS services in order to support struggling learners. We adapt, modify, supplement, and develop effective curriculum. We analyze student work samples and behaviors to determine the nature of the problems. We also analyze teaching style, expectations and perceptions, classroom management, and take into account cultural diversity. RtI uses tiers of intervention for struggling ELLs. We monitor students to determine if they are progressing as they should academically. In Tiers I and II general education teachers provide instruction and interventions. Only after ELLs fail to respond to small group and intense individual interventions, they are referred to special education. We involve special education teachers to help develop interventions and plan assessments for students receiving instruction and interventions in Tiers I and II. They do not provide instruction until Tier III, when the student could be referred 2018-19 CEP 58  and identified for special education. We make sure the students' difficulties are the result of a disability and not second language acquisition. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We analyze the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data to determine proficiency levels, strengths and areas of need across all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. After analyzing the EDAT tool from ATS, we are able to see which ELLs are at risk level due to ELA, Math, NYSESLAT scores. The EDAT also tells us which students are long term ELLs, which we address by forming groups for long term ELLs and teaching those skills in which they need to grow in on the NYSESLAT. For example, we create social speaking groups for students who must strengthen their speaking skills. We are able to recognize weakness areas by anazlying raw NYSESLAT scores in each modality, which allows us to create academic goals for each student. We found that most of our ELLs need support in reading and writing due to the shifts in Common Core State Standards. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data continues to drive instruction. Many of our ELLs struggle with listening skills, so we create instruction that teaches them note taking strategies. The instructional/inquiry team constantly analyzes NYS ELA and NYS Math scores in the beginning of the school year and as the school year progresses in order to identify student strengths and needs in specific skills and strategies. Based on all of this information, we give support as needed. Once we analyze proficiency levels, we create groups based upon these levels and exam data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The inquiry team creates 6 week academically targeted cycles in ELA and Math in order to address the needs of our students. This information is disseminated to administration, classroom teachers, and out of classroom teachers on a monthly basis. Students become experts on one topic at a time during the 6 week cycles in order to master a skill. We focus on the skills that students need assistance with according to NYS ELA and NYS Math exam data. We use NYSESLAT data in order to group ELLs by proficiency levels to maximize effective instruction. When necessary, we adjust our program in order to design appropriate curriculum for each child in ELA, Math, and all other content areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 46Q, ENL instruction is delivered in both a push in(where numbers allow) and pull-out model. ENL classes are formed based on the English Language Learners current grade and English language ability. Three teachers, both licensed and state certified in ENL, provide our ELLs with free standing ENL services in English. Three classroom teachers with both licenses in ENL and common branch will be servicing their ELLs for some of the mandated ENL minutes in small groups in their own classroom setting, in English. Students are grouped heterogeneously by need and grade level in our push in and pull-out ENL instructional program. When possible, the ENL push in is during the literacy block so comprehension is maximized. English Language Learners are receiving the New York State mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction time based on student proficiency levels based on individual NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing data. Entering and emerging level ELLs are receiving 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly (180 mins Stand-Alone ENL, 180 mins Integrated ENL.) Transitioning level ELLs are receiving 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either Integrated ENL or Stand-Alone ENL. Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding level (proficient ELLs) are receiving 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week, 2018-19 CEP 59  per Part 154. Planning arrangements between ENL and classroom teachers take place during common preps and grade meetings. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are grouped heterogeneously by need and grade level in our push in and pull-out ESL instructional program. When possible, the ESL push in is during the literacy block so comprehension is maximized. English Language Learners are receiving the New York State mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction time based on student proficiency levels based on individual NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing data. Entering and emerging level ELLs are receiving 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly (180 mins Stand-Alone ENL, 180 mins Integrated ENL.) Transitioning level ELLs are receiving 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either Integrated ENL or Stand-Alone ENL. Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding level (proficient ELLs) are receiving 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week, per Part 154. Planning arrangements between ESL and classroom teachers take place during common preps and grade meetings. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program is taught in English. In order to make content areas comprehensible we tap into prior knowledge, give individual support, scaffold and differentiate content, incorporate the use of graphic organizers and thinking maps to sort thinking, and have collaborative learning. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing the language demands of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support through the use of paraprofessionals, student teachers, and advanced speaking native language students. We often utilize Mandarin speaking support, as well as Korean, Punjabi, Urdu, Arabic, and Spanish. Based upon the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, the following strategies and practices are used for all of our ELLs (entering, emerging, expanding, transitioning, and commanding): Tier II and III vocabulary work, journal writing, drama, poetry, chanting, singing, choral speaking, computer word processing, book making, reader’s theater. All instruction is delivered in English. Reading, writing and mathematics skills are reinforced with special attention given to the conventions of grammar and usage. Real-life experiences are provided to increase and encourage the use of English vocabulary. Cooperative learning groups, paired learning, thematic units, word walls, graphic organizers, thinking maps, Total Physical Response, teacher modeling and trips are all part of instruction. We also utilize a web based English language program from DuoLingo as a technical and tactile tool towards English proficiency. Scaffolding techniques are always used to facilitate and enhance learning while making the content and language instruction comprehensible for English Language Learners. The following scaffolding strategies are implemented in order to support students' understanding of the academic curriculum: Modeling when introducing a new task, learners need to see or hear what a developed product looks like; Bridging activities to access prior knowledge to establish the basis for new information. This includes brainstorming, anticipatory charts and identifying related literature and experiences; contexualization which refers to putting words in context in order to convey meaning of unfamiliar words using visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers, and other realia services; Schema building which involves bringing to light the connections that exist between and across concepts and the curriculum. Strategies such as graphic organizers, story mapping, jigsaw, etc… help students gain a wider understanding of how concepts fit together; metacognitive development involves the explicit teaching and learning of strategies that enable students to become autonomous learners ; such as thinking maps, KWL activities, think alouds, and reading with a focus; Text representation which involves taking a 2018-19 CEP 60  known text and changing it for a new purpose using a different genre such as dramatizations, storyboards and post cards. In addition, cooperative learning strategies are very useful in helping English Language Learners improve their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Additional strategies used to facilitate language acquisition are predictable and consistent classroom routines, aided diagrams, lists, and easy to read schedules on the board or on charts to which the teacher refers frequently. Also employed is additional time and opportunities for practice, emphasizing vocabulary development by identifying and clarifying difficult words and passages within texts in order to facilitate comprehension, summarizing and paraphrasing text, and always targeting both content and English language objectives. Though English Language Learners are grouped according to both English proficiency and grade, differentiated groups are formed within each class in order to further meet the needs of individual students. ELLs are continually monitored both formally (tests) and informally (observations). Among our more formal assessments are the TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project K-5), and Words Their Way. ELL students also take the ELL Periodic Assessments. The data from each assessment is gathered by the teachers and shared with the ENL teachers. The teachers meet on a continuous basis to analyze the data and determine the proper skills/lessons to be taught. Students are taught in strategy and guided groups according to their individual levels of proficiency in each skill area addressed. Furthermore, English Language Learners are given additional support when necessary in ELA, math and other content areas through the use of intervention programs such as Wilson Reading Systems (grades 1-5), Fundations (K-2), At Risk SETSS , RtI, Great Leaps, ENL after school, and ENL summer school. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are given the opportunity to take the NYSED exams in translated versions, if necessary. ELLs who are administered the NYSITELL and whose home language is Spanish, are administered the Spanish Lab if they do not test proficient on the NYSITELL. We use the results of the Spanish Lab to determine their fluency in Spanish. For newcomer ELLs, we administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questions with the help of bilingual staff members. Bilingual staff are involved with ELLs who need assistance. Newcomer students utilize the DuoLingo online program in order to maintain native language skills, as well learn new English skills. Native language books, dictionaries, and glossaries are available. In addition, computer software is used to differentiate instruction and facilitate language acquisition. Our ENL teachers meet with the classroom teachers and together they continually discuss and plan instruction for our ELLs in order to ensure cohesion across the school day and in every content area. Writing samples in the native language are used to determine native language and content knowledge.Native language is incorporated into English instruction as a support to clarify, build prior knowledge, extend comprehension and bridge experiences. This is done through technology, bilingual staff, peers, native language materials and flexible groups. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for all of our English Language Learners. a. We currently do not have any SIFE students. In the event that we do have SIFE students, we will address each student's individual needs. For newcomer ELLs in grades 3 and up, we administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questions with the help of bilingual staff members. In addition, we differentiate instruction, focus on students' strengths, provide RtI, and Title III programs. We have access to DuoLingo language program for classrooms. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing the language demands of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support. If necessary, SIFE students are provided an iPad/iPod in order to support language acquisition. b. Our newcomers are continually assessed and closely monitored throughout the school year. Based on the students' needs, and abilities, they are given ENL support towards English proficiency as well as meeting the curriculum needs of their grade. All newcomers receive their mandated 360 minutes of ENL instruction each week in order to support their efforts towards success. For our ELLs who must take the NYS ELA after one year, in addition to the support we give them during their 2018-19 CEP 61  mandated sessions each week, we greatly encourage them to participate in our both our Title III after school program and our district wide Title III summer school program where we specifically focus our attention to their individual needs towards meeting grade proficiency on the NYS ELA. We also ensure that ENL testing modifications are in place at the time of the standardized exam as well as all exams in preparation for the NYS ELA. Support programs such as RtI, and DuoLingo, Google Translate, are also administered as necessary. Peer tutoring is also available if needed and lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing the language demands of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support . We differentiate lessons as necessary to fit the needs of our newcomer ELLs including the use of thinking maps, picture supports, Total Physical Response as a form a vocabulary acquisition. When necessary, newcomers students are provided an iPad/iPod in order to support language acquisition. c. Our plan for ELLs receiving service for 4 to 6 years is once again to follow their required instructional ENL time each week. As we do with our newcomers, we continually assess their English proficiency as well as the curriculum needs in their grade and use this data to drive our instruction and create a safe and effective educational atmosphere for them. As stated above, Title III, RtI, DuoLingo, Google Translate, guidance, bilingual glossaries, bilingual libraries and peer tutoring are available when necessary. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing the language demands of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support . When necessary, developing ELL students are provided an iPad/iPod in order to support language acquisition. d. Our long term ELLs receive various supports throughout the school year. We address each student's individual needs. In addition, we will differentiate instruction, focus on students' strenghts, provide RtI , and Title III programs. We would also have access to the web based program DuoLingo. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing the language demands of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support. When necessary, these long term ELLs are provided an iPad/iPod in order to support language acquisition. e. Former ELLs are provided 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. In addition, they are given testing accommodations (time extension, separate location, translated glossaries,…) Our former ELLs join lunch programs, such as PALS, Peer Assisted Language Support in order to support newcomer and beginner ELLs. They strengthen their own English language, as well as their native language while they offer support to younger ELLs. Former ELLs expand upon the English language with two periods of support each week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Strategies we use for ELL-SWDs to access content area and accelerate English language development are: tapping into prior knowledge, meaningful and standards based language use across curriculum at student's instructional level, collaborative learning, teaching Tier II and Tier III vocabulary, scaffolding and differentiation. We provide our ELLs with disabilities with tools to build upon independence and to master skills as the school year progresses. We adapt lessons in order to maximize each student's potential, with a focus on their IEP goals and needs. Materials used are Ready Gen, Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, Envision Math, Avenues ENL books, Passport to Social Studies, Math in the City, National Geographic lexile texts, Reach by National Geographic, Smartboards, computers, bilingual books, iPads, tapping into prior knowledge, graphic organizers, thinking maps, manipulatives, and visuals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELL SWD curriculum and instruction is presented in multiple ways and allow for diverse avenues of expression. Technology , tapping into prior knowledge, meaningful and standards based language use across curriculum at student's instructional level, individual support, scaffolding and differentiation are all strategies we use to ensure access to general education curriculum and Common Core Standards. We are cognizant of students' strengths and challenges when planning Common Core 2018-19 CEP 62  instruction, and focus on IEP goals and needs. Flexibility in scheduling allows our ELL SWD to remain in general education classrooms and have special ed teachers(SETSS, 12-1, and ICT) address their needs based on the goals in the IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our students receive differentiated instruction in ELA, math and other content areas. Our ELLs are no exception. We offer our ELLs individualized instruction targeting their English language needs as well as their curriculum needs towards meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. English Language Learners are given additional support when necessary in ELA, math and other content areas through the use of intervention programs such as Wilson Reading Systems (grades 1-5), Reading Recovery, Fundations (K-2), SETSS, RtI, Great Leaps K-5, and summer school. NYS bilingual glossaries are provided in different content areas in order to support each childs' understanding of the lesson and materials.These interventions are in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our Title III afternoon program will be offered for a longer period of time. We will continue to offer our PALS lunch program weekly in order to allow current and former ELLs a peer support group to teach and learn from one another with native language support in order to improve upon English skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and they participate in all of them. Translated letters are sent home to encourage all ELLs to participate in our programs, and all of our ELLs love to participate. We make phone calls with translators to ensure that parents received the letters and that they understand all free programs that we offer. All ELLs are greatly encouraged to attend our Title III after school program. They are also invited to our district wide Title III summer school program. In addition, they have the opportunity to participate in our after school self sustaining program. There is equity amongst all of our student population. ELLs are given given the same opportunities as the rest of the PS 46Q students.They participate in the after school music program, Suzuki violin, basketball, art, cheerleading, ballroom dancing, chorus, multicultural festivals, Project Beyond for Gifted and Talented Learners, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used in the school for ELA/Reading and Writing are Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. In addition, the following materials are used to support the learning of ELLs – computer software including DuoLingo, Google Translate, Dyned’s Let’s Go, thesauruses, picture dictionaries (Oxford and Longman) with accompanying CDs, Amazing English, Avenues, Imagine, Reach by National Geographic, Words Their Way for word work, vocabulary and writing, guided reading books, Big Books, picture books with accompanying audio cassettes, videos with accompanying books. Paired books (fiction and nonfiction about the same topic), sentence builder links, classroom library of picture books, chapter books, poetry, science, social studies and math books, games and maps.We have leveled libraries available for all of our students including our ELLs to check out books on their independent reading levels. We also have bilingual libraries for students to check out books in their native language as well. The instructional materials used for Math are Envision Math and Math in the City. We have hands on tools such manipulatives for use in mathematics instruction. For social studies curriculum, we use the Passport to Social Studies Curriculum. ELLs are provided with colorful flashcards of new vocabulary, as well as graphic images in order to relate the curriculum to the real world. 2018-19 CEP 63  In order to integrate technology, each regular classroom and ENL classroom has a Smart Board that is used with all of our students including our ELLs. In addition, we have multiple mobile carts with laptops and iPads of which all teachers including our ENL teachers have access to, and 10 iPads for ELLs to access. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Throughout each program model, ELLs are given the opportunity to express themselves in their native language when needed through their writing. When incoming ELLs arrive from other countries, we try to team them up with students who speak their language or place them in classrooms where there is a paraprofessional who speaks their language. We want our ELLs to feel comfortable and confident in asking questions and expressing themselves. We also have bilingual dictionaries and bilingual libraries available for their use. At PS 46 we have respect for and celebrate the linguistic and cultural diversity of students. There is always collaboration between school, home and community. Native language is incorporated into English instruction as a support to clarify, build prior knowledge, extend comprehension and bridge experiences. This is done through technology, bilingual staff, peers, native language materials and flexible groups. ELLs are given the opportunity to take the NYSED exams in translated versions, if necessary. ELLs who are administered the NYSITELL and whose home language is Spanish, are administered the Spanish Lab if they do not test proficient on the NYSITELL. We use the results of the Spanish Lab to determine their fluency in Spanish. For newcomer ELLs, we administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questions with the help of bilingual staff members. Bilingual staff are involved with ELLs who need assistance. Newcomer students utilize the DuoLingo online program in order to maintain native language skills, as well learn new English skills. In addition, computer software is used to differentiate instruction and facilitate language acquisition. Our ENL teachers meet with the classroom teachers and together they continually discuss and plan instruction for our ELLs in order to ensure cohesion across the school day and in every content area. Writing samples in the native language are used to determine native language and content knowledge. Native language is incorporated into English instruction as a support to clarify, build prior knowledge, extend comprehension and bridge experiences. This is done through technology, bilingual staff, peers, native language materials and flexible groups. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our English Language Learners are given their required ENL service support in relation to their ages and current grade level. They are given bilingual texts, glossaries and translation services when necessary. In addition, instruction is differentiated in order to meet each child's individual needs as they strive towards both English proficiency as well as meeting their grade's curriculum requirements. The maximum allowable grade span for grouping instruction in grades K-12 is two contiguous grades, except for ELLs in a special class. We place our ELLs in small groups based upon grade level and proficiency levels. We ensure that all required services are given by appropriate teachers and we enter this information into STARS. Based on IEP goals and recommendations, we plan instruction for our ELLs with disabilities. Based upon most recent NYSESLAT/NYSITELL score data, we plan each ELLs' appropriate minutes of service according to the CR-Part 154. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building or have a co-location. Instructional materials are shared within our entire school building. We share materials such as TCRWP curriculum, Fontas & Pinnell Leveled library books, and Envision Math. Each regular classroom and ENL classroom has a Smart Board that is used with all of our students including our ELLs. In addition, we have two mobile carts with laptops of which all teachers including our ENL teachers have access to, and 10 iPads for ELLs to access. We have leveled libraries available for all of our students including our ELLs to check out books on their independent reading levels. We have hands on tools such manipulatives for use in mathematics instruction. In addition, the following materials are used to support the learning of ELLs – computer software including DuoLingo, Dyned’s Let’s Go, thesauruses, picture dictionaries (Oxford and Longman) with accompanying CDs, Amazing English, Avenues, Imagine, Reach by National Geographic, Words Their Way for word work, vocabulary and writing, guided reading books, Big Books, picture books with accompanying audio cassettes, videos with accompanying books, Paired books (fiction and nonfiction about the same topic), sentence builder links, classroom library of picture books, chapter books, poetry, science, social studies and math books, games and maps. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 64  We have a district wide Title III summer school program for ELLs in grades 2-5 taught by ENL teachers. We also have a self sustaining summer camp program for grades K-5. Title III after school for ELLs is offered to ELLs in grades 2-5. We pair newly enrolled ELLs with bilingual buddies to assist them in the classroom and throughout the school building. We give newly enrolled ELL students the opportunity to come to our school during the summer and familiarize themselves with both PS 46Q as well as provide them with educational opportunities during the summer months. ENL teachers offer a lunch program (PALS) to provide ELLs and former ELLs with peer support in their native languages and in English. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff development takes place at grade conferences and faculty meetings. Throughout the school year, our ENL teachers attend professional development through our DELLs. They turnkey the information to our classroom and cluster teachers, as well as non-pedagogic staff, sharing pertinent information on working with ELLs in all content areas and ensuring continuity across the ENL program and the classroom. They attend training in Common Core and ENL methodologies as well as continuously being updated regarding NYSESLAT and NYSITELL training and policies. The ENL teachers work closely with the secretaries to review all important information. ELL personnel will be attending professional development on TCRWP for ELLs, using technology in classrooms with ELLs, RtI for ELLs, EDAT tools, and scaffolding and differentiation. It is important that our non-pedagogic staff including lunch aides, paraprofessionals, school aides, and all building staff attend ELL professional development because every single day they are working with ELLs and must know what methods work best for each child. The ENL teachers attend meetings, workshops, professional developments addressing academic rigor and the Common Core Learning Standards and this information is presented to classroom and cluster teachers. There are various workshops and Professional Development opportunities informing teachers how to facilitate student learning in hopes of meeting or exceeding Common Core Learning Standards when working with ELLs and Former ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers conduct professional development activities for the school pedagogical and non pedagogical staff during after-school meetings. An ENL workshop is planned during the months of September, November, January, March, and May for all staff to attend. All ENL teachers attend 50% of the required professional development hours both in school and at out of building ENL meetings (DELLs, ELL Compliance Meetings). Both the congruence meetings and the ENL workshop fulfill the 15% of total hours of ELL training for our staff members. Lesson support and modeling is provided by ENL teachers on an as needed basis.When the ENL teacher pushes in, ENL techniques and strategies to support the Common Core Learning Standards are modeled for the classroom teachers. Teachers keep record of their attendance and pertinent information received during the workshop. Administration keeps copies of all ELL training attendance sheets and all professional 2018-19 CEP 65  development hours. 15% of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including focus on best practices for teaching strategies for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are offered Title III English morning-school adult classes in order to strengthen their English skills. In addition, they are given parent workshops throughout the year to inform them of upcoming assessments and student progress on NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and ENL assessments. Translators are available at all parent workshops and meetings. We meet individually with all parents of ELLs during parent engagement hours during the school year. At this time, we discuss goals of the program, student language development progress, results of language proficiency assessments, and language development needs in all content areas. In addition to parent teacher conferences, initial orientations, or other meetings, we meet with parents individually to discuss the goals of the program and their child's progress. At these meetings we provide parents with qualified interpreters and translators. These qualified interpreters work in the school as bilingual staff, and if they are not available we contact the NYCDOE Translation & Interpretation Unit. We discuss with parents their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all academic content areas. Attendance for these meetings are recorded on parent engagement logs and checklists. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At PS 46Q, we have high parent involvement. We offer parents numerous times throughout the year when they can participate in activities with their children both during the school day and during after school events. We have parent workshops, ENL Title III Morning Adult program, NYSESLAT Parent Orientation, school trips, food festivals, Math & Health family fun night, Staff Basketball Fundraiser game, international food day, class culminating activities, PTA family nights, shows, and various other activities. We have staff members who speak second languages and are available to translate when necessary. Parents of ELLs are active participants in all of the PS 46Q extra curricular parent activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stamo Karalazarides, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Alley Pond School School DBN: 26Q046 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Stamo Karalazarides Title Principal Stephanie Famoso Assistant Principal Donna Kodjapashis Parent Coordinator Stephanie Waring ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elaine Ngai Parent Leonard Galit Teacher/Subject Area Zipora Cysner Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nicole Myers School Counselor Danielle Giunta Tara Davidson Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Field Support Liaison D 26 Sonia Chojar Other SETSS/ESL Heather Rodriguez Jamie Sussman Other RtI Other RtI Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q046 School Name: The Alley Pond School Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this *Stephanie Waring conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No LAC (Language Access Coordinator), ESL Teacher & Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), generate RHLA and RPOB ATS reports, look at student emergency cards, and review Language Information Surveys to determine parents language preference. We receive referrals from both teachers and the Parent Coordinator. Our Parent Coordinator also surveys parents before and after school and informs them about our written/oral translation services. Our findings are that the major languages in our school that the parents request translation for are Chinese, Korean, and Spanish. In addition, the low incidence languages are Greek, Urdu, Bengali, and Arabic. Teachers were informed of these findings during grade conferences and informal conversations. These services are for all parents, not just for parents of ELLs. We analyze data from ATS reports RHLA and RPOB and share with the school community including parents and teachers. We provide parents with translations when filling out student emergency contact cards and give them access to translators and translated versions. We use the information on the emergency contact cards to determine preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Most parents request English as their preferred languages for both written and oral communication. Some parents request Chinese, Korean or Spanish communications. We use in house school staff and DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit, or outside vendor language services to help with translation and interpretation. If necessary, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. While we are unable to translate into every language spoken in house at our school, we can translate into our most frequently used languages. We will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises, as well as utilize the services of our many bilingual staff members. Most parents request English as their preferred languages for both written and oral communication. Some parents request Chinese, Korean or Spanish communications. Most parents request English as their preferred languages for both written and oral communication. Some parents request Chinese, Korean or Spanish communications. Arabic- 1 Arabic- .09% Arabic- 1 Arabic- .09% Bengali- 2 Bengali- .18% Bengali- 2 Bengali- .18% Chinese- 263 Chinese- 23.78% Chinese- 226 Chinese- 20.45% Korean- 58 Korean- 5.24% Korean- 59 Korean- 5.34% Mandarin- 0 Mandarin- 0 Mandarin- 35 Mandarin- 3.17% English- 760 English -68.72% English- 762 English- 68.96% Spanish- 20 Spanish- 1.81% Spanish- 18 Spanish- 1.63% Urdu- 2 Urdu- .18% Urdu- 2 Urdu- .18% Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 263 Korean- 58 Mandarin- 0 English- 760 Spanish- 20 Urdu- 2 Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 263 Korean- 58 Mandarin- 0 English- 760 Spanish- 20 Urdu- 2 Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 23.78% Korean- 5.24% Mandarin- 0 English -68.72% Spanish- 1.81% Urdu- .18% Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 23.78% Korean- 5.24% Mandarin- 0 English -68.72% Spanish- 1.81% Urdu- .18% Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 226 Korean- 59 Mandarin- 35 English- 762 Spanish- 18 Urdu- 2 Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 226 Korean- 59 Mandarin- 35 English- 762 Spanish- 18 Urdu- 2 Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 20.45% Korean- 5.34% Mandarin- 3.17% English- 68.96% Spanish- 1.63% Urdu- .18% Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 20.45% Korean- 5.34% Mandarin- 3.17% English- 68.96% Spanish- 1.63% Urdu- .18% 2018-19 CEP 70  Most parents request English as their preferred languages for both written and oral communication. Some parents request Chinese, Korean or Spanish communications. Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 263 Korean- 58 Mandarin- 0 English- 760 Spanish- 20 Urdu- 2 Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 23.78% Korean- 5.24% Mandarin- 0 English -68.72% Spanish- 1.81% Urdu- .18% Arabic- 1 Bengali- 2 Chinese- 226 Korean- 59 Mandarin- 35 English- 762 Spanish- 18 Urdu- 2 Arabic- .09% Bengali- .18% Chinese- 20.45% Korean- 5.34% Mandarin- 3.17% English- 68.96% Spanish- 1.63% Urdu- .18% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English & Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information September 2017 Welcome Parent Orientation Letters NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) September 2017 NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations September 2017 Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyers Cell Phone Policy How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The translated documents we disseminate are, newsletters, calendars, report cards (available online), after school program information, adult morning ESL program, Title III program information, notices for parent workshops, open school invitations and special events. These documents include but are not limited to: -Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information -Welcome Parent Orientation Letters -NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) -NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations -Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyer -Cell Phone Policy -PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info -Parent Meeting Letters 2018-19 CEP 71 These translated documents are distributed at the same time as the school population. In addition, NYSESLAT translated information is distributed 3 weeks before administration of the NYSELAT. Parents are informed that the DOE has Translated student report cards available in many languages online for identified parents in their native languages. We send documents to the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to request translated versions in a timely manner. PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info April 2018 Parent Meeting Letters April 2018 September 2017 September 2017 (as necessary to schedule parent appointments throughout the school year) Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information Welcome Parent Orientation Letters NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyers Cell Phone Policy PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info Parent Meeting Letters September 2017 September 2017 September 2017 April 2018 April 2018 The translated documents we disseminate are, newsletters, calendars, report cards (available online), after school program information, adult morning ESL program, Title III program information, notices for parent workshops, open school invitations and special events. These documents include but are not limited to: -Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information -Welcome Parent Orientation Letters -NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) -NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations -Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyer -Cell Phone Policy 2018-19 CEP 72  Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information Welcome Parent Orientation Letters NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyers Cell Phone Policy PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info Parent Meeting Letters September 2017 September 2017 (as necessary to schedule parent appointments throughout the school year) September 2017 September 2017 September 2017 April 2018 April 2018 September 2017 September 2017 (as necessary to schedule parent appointments throughout the school year) -PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info -Parent Meeting Letters These translated documents are distributed at the same time as the school population. In addition, NYSESLAT translated information is distributed 3 weeks before administration of the NYSELAT. Parents are informed that the DOE has Translated student report cards available in many languages online for identified parents in their native languages. We send documents to the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to request translated versions in a timely manner. The translated documents we disseminate are, newsletters, calendars, report cards (available online), after school program information, adult morning ESL program, Title III program information, notices for parent workshops, open school invitations and special events. These documents include but are not limited to: -Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information -Welcome Parent Orientation Letters -NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) -NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations -Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyer -Cell Phone Policy -PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info -Parent Meeting Letters These translated documents are distributed at the same time as the school population. In addition, NYSESLAT translated information is distributed 3 weeks before administration of the NYSELAT. Parents are informed that the DOE has Translated student report cards available in many languages online for identified parents in their native languages. We send documents to the NYCDOE Translation and 2018-19 CEP 73  Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information Welcome Parent Orientation Letters NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyers Cell Phone Policy PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info Parent Meeting Letters September 2017 September 2017 September 2017 April 2018 April 2018 September 2017 September 2017 (as necessary to schedule parent appointments throughout the school year) Interpretation Unit in order to request translated versions in a timely manner. The translated documents we disseminate are, newsletters, calendars, report cards (available online), after school program information, adult morning ESL program, Title III program information, notices for parent workshops, open school invitations and special events. These documents include but are not limited to: -Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information -Welcome Parent Orientation Letters -NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement, etc.) -NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations -Math & Health Family Fun Night Flyer -Cell Phone Policy -PALS (Peer Assisted Language Support) Permission Slips/ Program Info -Parent Meeting Letters These translated documents are distributed at the same time as the school population. In addition, NYSESLAT translated information is distributed 3 weeks before administration of the NYSELAT. Parents are informed that the DOE has Translated student report cards available in many languages online for identified parents in their native languages. We send documents to the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to request translated versions in a timely manner. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences with translators available Nov 16 2017 March 15 2018 interpretation service(s)? All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 74  Curriculum nights with translators available. May 23 2018 Sept 13 2017 Parent Workshops NYSESLAT workshop monthly throughout the school year Individual Parent ELL conferences April 2018 Parent-teacher conferences with translators available Curriculum nights with translators available. Parent Workshops NYSESLAT workshop Individual Parent ELL conferences Weekly throughout the school year Nov 16 2017 March 15 2018 May 23 2018 Sept 13 2017 monthly throughout the school year April 2018 Weekly throughout the school year Parent-teacher conferences with translators available Curriculum nights with translators available. Parent Workshops NYSESLAT workshop Nov 16 2017 March 15 2018 May 23 2018 Sept 13 2017 monthly throughout the school year April 2018 This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented at each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the school year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual school staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented at each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the school year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual school staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented at each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the school year with 2018-19 CEP 75  Individual Parent ELL conferences Weekly throughout the school year Parent-teacher conferences with translators available Curriculum nights with translators available. Parent Workshops NYSESLAT workshop Individual Parent ELL conferences Nov 16 2017 March 15 2018 May 23 2018 Sept 13 2017 monthly throughout the school year April 2018 Weekly throughout the school year translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual school staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented at each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the school year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual school staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The parent coordinator sends out email blasts immediately in the event of a school emergency. We make phone calls in parents preferred languages in any emergency situations through the use of bilingual staff and the translation/ interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to ensure that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education, we have translated language guides and posters in the school lobby from the NYCDOE Translation & Interpretation Unit in order to welcome all Limited English speaking parents. Language Access Coordinators in the building were trained by the field support specialist about all 2018-19 CEP 76  materials available to teachers and parents for translation services. These coordinators then turnkey information to the rest of the pedagogical and non-pedagogical staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will use bilingual staff and contact DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. We will show translated editions of the Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access, Language ID Guide to provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require such services. Our goal is to ensure that parents whose language is other than English are provided with the opportunity to participate in their child's education. We inform all parents of the availability and access to language assistance services. Parents will be informed of their rights during PTA meetings, NYSESLAT meetings, individual parent meetings. We ensure this for all parents who require them, not just parents of ELLs. We plan to have school notices regarding parent workshops, PTA meetings, and Parent Teacher Conference notices translated. In addition, we have translated report cards administered on the Internet to the identified parents/guardians who request native language services. We also utilize the DOE translation unit, in addition to bilingual in-house staff and other outside vendors to translate our written notices. We plan to provide oral translation during the regular school day using our bilingual guidance counselors and our bilingual staff members. Signs are clearly posted in the main office/corridor for translation services. Whenever possible, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We post signs regarding visitor access in translated languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms we use to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services are parent surveys. Also feedback from PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences, phone conversations, food festivals, and assembly programs. In addition, the parent coordinator provides feedback from parents. All parents fill out school surveys online in their home languages in the beginning of every school year. 2018-19 CEP 77 
