2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q048 School Name: P.S. 048 WILLIAM WORDSWORTH Principal: PATRICIA M. MITCHELL 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: William Wordsworth 048 Pre K - 5 108-29 155 th Street 718 558 6700 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 28Q048 718 558 6710 Fax: Patricia Mitchell PMitche4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Patricia Mitchell Barry Hauptman Natalie Capers Patricia Mitchell DeMoneLewis N/A N/A District Information Mabel Muñiz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Boulevard MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 557-2623 Phone Number: FSC: HRD 718 557 2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 RockawayBoulevard mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 281 3259 Phone Number: 718 642 5855 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patricia Mitchell Barry Hauptman Natalie Capers N/A D. Lewis N/A N/A N/A Diana Guerrini Nicola Fletcher *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Rochelle Whichard NashlaJoseph MerinaGeorge Giezel Bryan Roger Edmunds AyanaMitchell Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The William Wordsworth elementary school is committed to providing scholars with multiple opportunities to engage with rigorous, common core aligned tasks that promote critical thinking in all areas of academia and the arts. Our entire learning community is dedicated to preparing scholars for college and careers in a safe and nurturing school that is supported by our Chancellor, school staff, parents, and community based organizations. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 48 is an elementary school located in South Jamaica New York. We currently serve 630 scholars from Pre Kindergarten to grade 5. What distinguishes our school from those in our peer horizon or even in our district are our strong family-community ties. In keeping with our Mission Statement, we are committed to ensuring that we create significant relationships so that learning will occur. Strengths, Accomplishments, and Challenges READING PROFICIENCY PROGRESS Five years ago in 2013, PS48 state data that suggested a vast majority of scholars were not reading proficiently. Our school partnered with the Pinkerton Foundation who pledged 1.2 million dollars in support of literacy improvement in our community. This collaborative was strategically implemented to provide support to sub groups of identified scholars and their families throughout the community including PS 40 (and now PS 160). Our collective objective was to raise the reading proficiency level of scholars based on running record data over a period of one year. Five years later--with support from Reading Partners, Jumpstart, Read Alliance, Reading Buddies, Literacy Inc., and the NY Public Library, we exceeded our original goal. Scholars who were a part of the initiative demonstrated tremendous reading growth and now see reading more as a social activity. This finding was as important to us as the proficiency data that we monitored so closely. Our 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot demonstrates that our upper grade scholars were also positively impacted by this integrated approach to delivering literary services. For example, in June 2018, 41% of our tested scholars were proficient in ELA based on state scores-- an increase of 12 points over 2017. In June 2018, 45% of our tested scholars were proficient in Mathematics based on state scores- an increase of 9 points over 2017. We will continue to use tools that ensure we engage in academically rigorous tasks. However, our collaborative work will focus on improvements creating more engaging tasks, determining levels of rigor and cohesiveness of success criteria. ATTENDANCE Historical attendance data for our school suggests that scholars and their families have struggled with adhering to our standards for attendance. 30% of scholars were chronically absent! Our school was highlighted by researcher Kim Nauer in her published report from the Center for New York City Affairs. Ms. Nauer's research and findings served to provide a wealth of information that our attendance team used to identify and address underlying reasons for chronic absenteeism. I served on a panel at the New School in November 2014 that included Deputy Mayor Richard Buery, and former New York City School Chancellor Rudy Crew to discuss our attendance strategies and to share insights on “A Better Picture of Poverty”. While we continue to struggle with less than stellar attendance rates, we continue to reduce the number of chronically absent scholars each year. What we found was that many incoming and transfer students are already chronically absent before enrolling at PS48. In other words, we "inherit" many chronic absence issues. To address this and other attendance issues our attendance team embarks on rigorous campaign to identify underlying issues that impact attendance rates. Our school's ongoing commitment to attendance improvement was highlighted in the October 2016 issue of Kappan magazine. Although we continue to struggle with reducing the number of chronically absent scholars, we are proud to have met our goal of reducing the number from 186 to 79 during the 2017-2018 school year. COMMUNITY BASED SUPPORT In 2016 the generous grant from the Pinkerton Foundation grew to 1.4 million dollars as we continued to strategically spearhead a powerful collaboration of ten community based organizations to improve literacy proficiency. In 2018, five years after the initial grant, our partners include SpringBoard Education (summer program), Jumpstart, Literacy Inc., Parent-Child Home Program, Queens Library, Reach out and Read, Read Alliance and Reading Partners. All interactions foster STRONG FAMILY-COMMUNITY TIES and STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT. 2018-19 CEP 10  In addition, we have maintained strong partnerships with the Jamaica YMCA, Afterschool Program, Y Swim for Life, SMILE dental associates,York College, Food Bank of New York, Jamaica Community Partnership, Praise Tabernacle, MIDORI. All of these community based organizations have a deep commitment to empowering scholars through literacy and self efficacy. COLLEGE AND CAREER College and Career Readiness is a central theme at PS 48. We are clear about our moral imperative to prepare our scholars for the rigors of college and/or careers. Each week scholars will take the "I will graduate Pledge" via the public address system. Our school will continue to inspire our young scholars to inquire and learn about careers in a variety of fields with our annual Career Day. If you have never been to Career Day at PS 48, you need to check it out. It is amazing to see scholars interacting with judges, artists, business owners, military personnel, civil servants, and fashion designers,etc. We are more amazed to hear their excitement about what scholars will be when they grow up. This year with support from our York College partners and Literacy Inc., grade 5 scholars will again participate in the York College College tour to plant seeds about college as an viable option. LEADERSHIP PS 48 is also unique in its approach to encouraging teacher and overall staff leadership and professional collaboration. We do at a high level. We foster and celebrate personal leadership from ALL staff members. We know the impact of strong relational trust and true collaboration can be felt throughout our school community. We respect and honor the unique gifts that our staff brings to our school community and ensure that those gifts are nurtured. Our school has 37 committees and teams (lead by staff members) that ensure that our school culture is one that reflects student interests, the arts, and academic support. Administrators will continue to monitor Advance data to create and implement professional development to meet the needs of our staff. We strongly suggest and encourage self-efficacy and self-reflective practice with respect to improvement. Our administrative team and instructional teams will create professional development topics that support school-wide goals. These goals --based on summative and formative data, will be monitored through interim assessments and observations. Using the framework, administrators will provide teachers with next steps to improve their practice. Our school will one again partner with CEI to engage in instructional rounds. These rounds (based on the work of Elmore, Teitel and City from the Harvard School of Education) will focus on our problem of practice (student engagement). We will identify areas of improvement and build capacity using research based articles and resources. Articles that will support the work include: The ABC's of Engagement, Four Keys to Student Engagement, Schlechty on Engagement, and Towards Better Group Norms. Our instructional rounds will also enable us to continue to measure how well we create lessons that meet the needs of our scholars and engage them in rigorous tasks. USE OF DATA This year we will continue to track scholar progress and make curriculum revisions. Our running record data wall is one of the ways we will share goals for reading proficiency with the entire school community. By taking an active role in charting their own growth, we believe that scholars will continue to be more accountable for their reading goals and take an active role in achieving them. The data wall has been a huge success with parents, scholars and teachers. The data wall will enable staff to make strategic decisions about instructional strategies to make revisions to curriculum, provide support to scholars and monitor progress of sub-groups of scholars throughout the school year. We will continue to use various sources of data to track student progress throughout the year including assessment data in the following areas. 2.2 2018-19 CEP 11  Running record data in September, November, February, April and June  MOSL data in writing and mathematics October 2018 January (internal) and June 2019  MyOn! data to track daily reading habits  Attendance data to track attendance patterns  Student writing sample analysis by LDC Vertical Team CHALLENGES ● We find it challenging to meet the needs of our diverse learners that include students with a myriad of disabilities, English Language Learners (ELL)and Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). 1.2 For the 2018-2019 school year, P.S. 48 will hire an additional full time ENL teacher to ensure that the school addresses the language proficiency concerns of its steadily increasing English language learner population. Maintaining sufficient staffing for this special population provides support to content teachers as well as assists in fulfilling compliance regulations. ● We also found challenges in getting teachers to use tools to identify levels of rigor in classrooms. During the 2016-2017 school year, we began to use Webb's matrix to identify the level of rigor of student tasks. This year our focus will build on the work around ensuring that scholars are mastering the rich tasks . We will do this by looking at student work and providing supports based on student's needs. The kind of support and scaffolding students receive to master these rich CCLS tasks scaffolding will be closely monitored 1.2 ● We continue to face challenges with changing and/or shaping a culture that respects attendance excellence. Our Attendance Team and mentors will continue to aggressively support excellent attendance with our unconventional outreach, opportunities for recognition and building relationships with families for attendance improvement and excellence.  We will use Google docs to create and monitor curriculum revisions based on teacher team work, vertical team work and student work samples. 1.1 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our English language learners are considered a very special student population. They come with unique social, emotional, and academic needs due to prior experiences. Some may enter as refugees, migrants, students with interrupted formal education (SIFE), newcomer immigrants,unaccompanied children, as well as internationally adopted students. Aside from making our English language learners feel welcome and confident knowing that their wide array of cultural backgrounds enrich and enhance the classroom environment, there are a few other critical needs that must be addressed. They need to master academic language and vocabulary which will filter over into their reading and writing. Our P.S. 48 team must ensure that they possess the English language skills necessary to access grade level content. We will to continue to work collaboratively with Robert Zuzzulo to ensure that we provide ENL scholars with access to curriculum. Our theory of action is that if teachers work collaboratively, we can ensure that these scholars have equity with respect to rigor and language objectives. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 12  Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. We ensure that our instruction is rigorous, based on Karen Hess' matrix, and use that tool to collaborate, plan, implement with appropriate resources. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q048 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 601 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 92 92 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 15 28 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 12.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.0% 19.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.75 2% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 67 28 92.1% 4.2% 24.6% 54.2% 18.6% 6.0% 2 2% 4.4 44.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES NO N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our latest Quality Review and Principal Performance Review, we have some work to do to increase our ability to introduce RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION through questioning, use of assessment, differentiation and stellar instructional practices. Feedback was as follows: Areas of Focus ● Across classrooms, IF TEACHERS employ teaching strategies (including questioning and , scaffolds where appropriate, and provide multiply entry points into the curricula) our scholars’ level of engagement will increase as evidenced by student work products. (1.2) To address this feedback and next steps we: Math- Provided teachers with a tool to assess the use of the 8 Mathematical Practices in grades K-5 during Math instruction. Math -Provided teachers with questions that help them prompt scholars to demonstrate their proficiency with CCLS mathematical practices. ELA- Provided teachers with strategies and practices to support readers with inferential questions based on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels from A-Z during guided reading lessons. ELA- Provided teachers with professional development on assigning appropriate book selections on the MyOn! digital reading platform to ensure that scholars are reading books voraciously at or above their F and P level ● Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self- assessment so that teachers inconsistently make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. (2.2) To address this feedback and next steps we: 2018-19 CEP 15  CROSS CURRICULAR - Provided teachers with a tool with ideas for ensuring that ongoing checks for understanding (Making Student Thinking Visible (from Metamorphosis) are used to assess and make adjustments to meet the needs of our learners. CROSS CURRICULAR - Provided teachers with refresher course in the use of quality rubrics for self-assessment, peer assessment and teacher assessment as part of improved comprehensive unit planning. You will see the use of rubrics and checklists in all classrooms that facilitate clear next steps for scholars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 scholars in grades K-5 will increase proficiency in extended response questions by 10% based on CCLS aligned writing assessment prompts as measured by pre-and post MOSL performance series. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Scholars will write responses to literature and achieve mastery of at least 3 genres based on Teacher's College Units of Study Grades K-5 Administration October 2018- June 2019 Administrators will continue to utilize a common framework (Danielson) to observe teachers and provide meaningful feedback. Next steps for teachers will be monitored via follow-up observations,reflective feedback and coaching 1.2 Regarding rigorous instruction Families will be provided with supports to address the cognitive demands of CCLS throughout the year in a myriad of ways. Weekly grade homework sheets will include resource for parents. Teachers will create and adhere to assessment calendars. The PS48Q website will house these documents for access by families. 3.4 Based on the Quality Snapshot, 76% of those surveyed responded positively about rigorous instruction in our school. We demonstrate our commitment to collaboration in a variety of ways. We will utilize the Literacy Design Collaborative as TC writing units to support the work of the Vertical team to analyze writing mastery progress.  Vertically align writing curriculum units and lessons with common core standards  Utilize Hess' matrix to ensure that we provide rigor in tasks and assignments  Review and discuss text complexity using a rubric for fiction and non-fiction text.  Use quality rubrics for student work that facilitate self-assessment, peer assessment and actionable next steps  Create supports in lesson plans that address the needs of sub groups of scholars All teachers October Administration 2018- June 2019 The entire school community September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams Bill Catucci, Marisol Catucci Jamie Rice LDC Instructional Specialist Office of Curriculum, Instruction, and Professional Learning New York City Department of Education 52 Chambers Street New York, NY 10007 (212) 323-7838 Laura Pessah Teacher's College 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Grade Leaders which comprise our school vertical team will support families with parent workshops in all grades designed to show parents how scholars tackle rigorous math problems using the 8 mathematical practices in October, and November 2018. In January and February 2019, our focus will be how to create short nd extended responses based on text prompts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our School Leadership Team will collaborate monthly to align our budget and resources and staff to support and implement actions plans for continuous improvement based on interim data. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 student MOSL scores will increase by 5% as evidenced by mid year MOSL assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) MOSL performance series task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our latest Quality Review and Principal Performance Review, we have some work to do to increase our ability to introduce RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION through questioning, use of assessment, differentiation and stellar instructional practices. Feedback was as follows: Areas of Focus ● Across classrooms, teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds where appropriate inconsistently provides multiply entry points into the curricula leading to uneven engagement of higher order thinking skills in student work products, including the work of SWDS. (1.2) ● Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self- assessment so that teachers inconsistently make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. (2.2) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will provide support for students' social emotional needs through Sanford Harmony curriculum implementation to decrease the number of classroom incidents by 50% as evidenced by OORS data. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Based on our Quality Review feedback for indicator 1.2 --teachers need to engage in practices that promote scaffolds for our diverse learners which will be evidenced by differentiation in planning and lesson implementation. Unit plans will include strategies for multiple entry points that engage all learners Based on District goals regarding Quality Review indicator 2.2 teachers teams will engage in aligning assessments to curricula. The data from formative assessments will be used to inform scholars about next steps AND inform teachers about instructional goals. Based on 2017 summative state math data, only 35% of our tested scholars are proficient in mathematics. To address this data, we willl departmentalize mathematics instruction for scholars in grades 3 and 4. Our selected teacher has a proven track record for balancing math instruction with procedural knowledge and conceptual understanding. Teachers will observe teaching strategies to increase their instructional repertoire and develop content knowledge for teachers. Awaiting state exam data to revise Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers October 2018- June 2019 Teacher Teams Administration All teachers November 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams Administration All teachers December 2018 June 2019 UFT Teacher Center Administration By June 2019 ALL teachers will provide support through Sanford Harmony curriculum scholars will engage in character development to decrease the number of classroom incidents by 50% as evidenced by OORS data. All teachers and Administrators November 2018-January 2019 Teacher Teams Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. This school will continue to embrace the diversity of the community we serve. We recently re-launched our school website which now features a Google translator for over 40 languages!! We want our families to be informed, engaged and ready to support our college and career-ready goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our School Leadership Team will collaborate to align our budget and resources and staff to support and implement actions plans for continuous improvement. We will meet each month to review goals, analyze data and revise action plans as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the school will see a 25% decrease in the number of classroom incidents as evidenced by OORS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CCLS aligned writing rubrics to be used at the end of each unit CCLS aligned math task rubrics to be used at the end of each unit Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on PPO feedback our school needed more effective ways to implement SDI to meet the needs of our students in mathematics. Our admin will strengthen the role and impact of the Teacher teams as they collaborate to design and deliver SDI for scholars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019 teachers in Grades in K-5 will work collaboratively in Teacher Teams to develop math lesson and unit plans that include strategies that demonstrate balance in conceptual understanding and procedural knowledge in mathematics to support our diverse learners as evidenced by an increase of one performance level in the math constructed responses as measured by in-house pre-and post assessment. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Based on the 2016, School Quality Snapshot, 76% of those surveyed responded positively about collaborative practice in our school. We demonstrate our commitment to collaboration in a variety of ways. We will continue to : All teachers October Teacher Teams 2017- June 2018  Align curriculum units and lessons with common core standards  Utilize Hess' matrix to ensure that we provide rigor in tasks and assignments  Review and discuss text complex, text features, and use of vocabulary in fiction and non fiction text.  Use quality rubrics for student work that facilitate self-assessment, peer assessment and actionable next steps  Create SDI or specially designed instructional plans that address the needs of sub groups of scholars ELLS, SWDs, subgroups 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to support parents in providing math workshop to educate parents in with mathematical practices and conceptual understanding on word problems math Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our School Leadership Team will collaborate to align our budget and resources and staff to support and implement CEP action plans for continuous improvement on November 16th and throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018 teacher teams will have at least 2 units in mathematics that support instructional shifts and rigor in performance tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOSL rubric will be used to score the math performance task in January 2018 and June 2018 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on PPO feedback our school needs a more effective Vertical Team for the purpose of Inquiry. By May 2017 our admin will strengthen the role and impact of the Vertical team to improve instruction and respond to student work analysis as evidenced by action plans and student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will support and provide teachers with professional learning on conducting effective guided reading and mathematical practices in procedural mathematics and conceptual understanding in order to promote student engagement and discussion as measured by an increase of one performance rating in 3b Questions and Discussion Technique and 3c Student Engagement in the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be involved in teacher-lead professional development for 10-week cycles based on the indicator 1E that is job-embedded, relevant and interdisciplinary Cohorts of teachers Selected Teacher leaders November 2017-January 2018 Teachers will utilize a tool to inform their pedagogy regarding text complexity to assist them with instructional goals and anticipating student misunderstandings All teachers October 2017- June 2018 Teachers will utilize Karen Hess' matrix to inform their pedagogy regarding performance task rigor to assist them with instructional strategies and SDI or specially designed instruction for sub-groups of scholars All teachers October 2018- June 2019 Mitchell, Christensen, Cush Mitchell, Christensen, Cush 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our teachers will continue to provide ongoing and weekly support for homework that is increasingly rigorous and complex in the task description. We do this by identifying DOK levels of tasks, incuding the Fountas and Pinnell levels on texts and including word counts for all assignments. We will also share with parents how scholars are using Mathematical practices to focus on conceptual understanding and not soley procedural knowledge. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Dorothy Cush will continue to support teachers in her role as a Teacher Center Specialist Professional Development in September will center around looking at student work and norming our thoughts about mastery. Professional Development in October will center around identifiying rigorous tasks and how to monitor the level of student engagement based on student work samples, walk-throughs and observations. ROUND I 2018-19 CEP 26  Professional Development in October/November will center around coaching and instructional rounds to gather data about student engagement trends. Professional Development in December/January will center around rigorous tasks and how to monitor the level of student engagement based on student work samples, walk-throughs and observations. ROUND II Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2018 School administrators will convene to review Advance data in Domains 1e and 1e to make revisions to professional learning opportunities for teachers based on data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Observation reports Instructional Round data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data, our school Quality Snapshot and summative data, our school has demonstrated that teachers at this school work tirelessly to support scholars with special needs to progress on local and state exams. Our need is to continueto to support SWD and ALL scholars with their ability to respond to questions that require the use of inferrencing skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In June 2019, there will be a increase of 30% of parents attendance to school events and workshops as evidenced by the parent attendance log as compared to last year. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly attendance team meetings will allow the team to analyze trends, plan celebrations and identify issues All students September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Teacher Monthly incentives by success mentors will encourage and acknowledge attendance goals met by families All families September 2018 June 2019 Charline Yorke, paraprofessional Parent workshops will be held in October raise awareness about the importance of exemplary attendance Targeted Families January 2018 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Springboard Collaborative - Summer Program for K-2 scholars and families, June 2018 BBQ 2. Jumpstart - Literacy Support for Pre-K and families, Open House October 2018 3. Read Alliance - After-school Literacy support for grade 1 Open House January 2019 4. Reading Partners- Literacy support for struggling and SIFE scholars Open House October 2018 5. Literacy Inc - Parental and Scholar Literacy support K-5 Parent Workshop Kick-Off September 2018 6.YMCA - After-school/summer/holiday programs for grade 3-5 scholars June 2018 Enrollment and Orientation 7. Midori Music- music instruction for grade 4/5 scholars May 2019 Recital 8.Young Debators - Teaching grade 5 scholars the Art of Courtroom Debate May 2019 Debate Competition 9. WildCat Basketball - Basketball Fundamentals for boys and girls Tournament Schedule Dec-May 2019 10. Wildcat Cheer Squad- Cheerleading Training for boys and girls . Dec-May 2019115. Pretty Brown Girls- Empowerment/Self Esteem Group for girls Rights of Passage June 2019 11. Arch4Kids- STEM curriculum in Bridge design and exploration 2018-19 CEP 29  12. STEAMS 3000- STEM curriculum geared toward solving world problems through sustainability 13. CookShop- Nutrition and Food Preparation education Monthly Workshops Oct- May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. AIDP funds, fundraisers in December 2018 and June 2019 will be used to support families Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 the Attendance Team mentors will report on progress to reduce the number of their respective chronically absent scholars by 25% and communicate with families regarding attendance progress. Feedback will be be provided to families by success mentors each month. Based on feedback, we will make changes and/or revisions to the attendance plan to support families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS reports including monthly RRSA, RAMO, and RPYA will be used to assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) MOSL scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Writing prompts Small group, One to one tutoring During School Day and Afterschool Read Alliance, Reading Partners, Math Tasks BELL Small group, One to one tutoring Engineering Small group, Is Elementary One to one tutoring Into the Woods STEAM Club Small group, One to one tutoring Small group, One to one tutoring During School Day and Afterschool During School Day and Afterschool During School Day and Afterschool During School Day and Afterschool Jamaica Community Partnership, YMCA 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 43 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. To meet the needs of scholars in transient housing and in temporary housing, we will set aside funds. These funds will be used for supplies, resources for parents, and scholars will be made available by our Parent Coordinator Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 54 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32 We plan to set aside Title I funds to support our STH population with transportation needs, school supply procurement, and counseling for families about community resources 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A Team of teachers and administrators create postings with qualifications and requirements that speak to adequate licensure and education and preferred professional attributes. We will develop the following to ensure we hire highly qualified staff:  Create a hiring committee (Principal , A.P. , TC Facilitator, and Dean) to collaborate about vacancies and long term absences  Create a series of questions and salient points for discussion during interview  Admin will utilize a quality rubric to make decisions about prospective applicants  Principal will schedule meetings with new teachers regarding requirements for tenure  Provide mentors for new teachers to provide feedback regarding professional contributions, impact on student learning   and instructional practice  Maintain teacher teams to encourage professional collaboration regarding CCLS tasks, homework, assessments, student data trends, instructional resources and best practices 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● A school professional learning plan for existing teachers to improve practice based on the NYC Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook ● Continually train and support in the Danielson Framework with teachers to familiarize them with criteria for exemplary teaching components 2018-19 CEP 34  ● Utilize an effective teacher model rubric (Danielson) to provide feedback and coaching for teachers ● Provide feedback to teachers in short and frequent observation cycles for continuous improvement ● Support new teachers in the tenure process with extra preps, demonstration lessons and quality feedback using the idea bank from the Division of Teaching and Learning ● Utilize BFSC supports and expertise to improve teacher practice based on data Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our school offers a comprehensive and aligned curriculum in all subject areas that focus on english language arts standards and mathematics. Teachers engage in vertical articulation to ensure that scholars are provided with rigorous instruction that prepares them for the cognitive demands of subsequent grades. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers regularly meet to design, create and analyze assessments for scholars on their grade. Teachers engage in practices that allow them to decide on appropriate questions, assessment measures, and rubrics to gauge student progress. We then engage in the practice of looking at student work as part of Inquiry to examine the best instructional practices for teaching the standard(s) being assessed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A 5A, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E x x x x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 244,331.00 82,738.00 11,200.00 0 3,281,299.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 CEP 36  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Title I Parent Involvement Policy and Parent-School Compact for The William Wordsworth School PS 48 Section I: Title I Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore PS 48, [in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act], is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of scholar achievement between our school and the families. PS 48 policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Advisory Council, as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. PS/ 48’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. `Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school 2018-19 CEP 38  surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the Parent Coordinator. In developing the PS 48 Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;   convening a Title I Parent Annual Meeting (prior to December 1st of each school year) for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times (e.g., morning, evening) and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation, child care or home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand;  involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; and 2018-19 CEP 39  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide general support to parents by:  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);  sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community;  supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; and  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  This Parent Involvement Policy (including the School-Parent Compact) was distributed for review by Patricia Mitchell on October 30th, November 18th and finally posted on the school website on November 24th, 2018. This Parent Involvement Policy was updated on _______________________________. The final version of this document will be distributed to the school community on or before wand will be available on file in the Parent Room. A copy of the final version of this policy will also be submitted to the Office of School Improvement as an attachment to the school’s CEP and filed with the Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy. [1] Please note that only New York City Public schools that have attained a student population of two-hundred (200) or more will receive funding to hire a Parent Coordinator. PS 48 will support parents and families of Title I scholars by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math and use of technology); 2. providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 4. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  5. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 6. providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS 48 will: Parental Involvement and School Quality  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact;  support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a [1]dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events in PCAR by the 15th of every month commencing September 2015. Activities will be planned for parents each month and reported to the Central Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA);  Enlist the PC to conduct and facilitate parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home at twice per month. 2018-19 CEP 42  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;)  Host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act. Beginning 2016, the Parent Coordinator will host this required meeting. Ms. Mitchell will host the 2015 meeting.  Enlist the PC to schedule additional parent meetings (e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;  translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. PS 48 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council;  supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events; 2018-19 CEP 43   Enlisting the Parent Coordinator to establish and maintain an electronic Parent Resource Center on the school website  hosting events to support male leadership in education for their children. Including parents/guardians, grandparents, uncles, cousins, brothers and foster parents;  Enlisting the Parent Coordinator to encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers through Learning Leaders program  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Working with the PC in developing and distributing a monthly school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Section II: School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 48 [in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. PS 48 staff and the parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 44   using academic learning time efficiently;  respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;  implementing a curriculum aligned to State Standards;  offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act;  To ensure that monthly newsletters provides a place to celebrate parent engagement I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships To ensure that our website keeps parents informed about up-coming events To create monthly calendars that help families organize and plan to support school events To ensure that parents of diverse backgrounds have access to information using Google translator on the school website To ensure that parents have a way to voice their concerns via parent coordinator to make changes that support scholars. Creating access to homework, rubrics, student progress reports that keep parents informed about actionable next steps Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to communicate with limited English speaking parents effectively.  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 45   arranging opportunities at least 2x per year for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and  planning Parent Engagement activities for parents during the school year (e.g., Open School Week); To ensure that monthly newsletters provides a place to celebrate parent engagement I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents To ensure that our website keeps parents informed about up-coming events To create monthly calendars that help families organize and plan to support school events To ensure that parents of diverse backgrounds have access to information using Google translator on the school website To ensure that parents have a way to voice their concerns via parent coordinator to make changes that support scholars. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent and adhere to the 97% attendance goal.  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary and/or use supports such as Dial-A-Teacher, Kahn’s Academy or Engage NY to support my child.  read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes)  set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 46  promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; Inquire about “Cool Culture “ at my child’s school.  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits with a minimum of 30 hours if my child is enrolled in YMCA  Attend at least 5 parent workshops during the school year---and attend at least 3 before January 30 2017  participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. I will also:  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups (e.g., school or district Title I Parent Advisory Councils, School or District Leadership Teams; and   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; PS 48 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 47  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council;  supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events;  Enlisting the Parent Coordinator to establish and maintain an electronic Parent Resource Center on the school website  hosting events to support male leadership in education for their children. Including parents/guardians, grandparents, uncles, cousins, brothers and foster parents;  Enlisting the Parent Coordinator to encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers through Learning Leaders program  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Working with the PC in developing and distributing a monthly school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  III. Student Responsibilities Scholar Responsibilities: 2018-19 CEP 48   attend school regularly and arrive on time;  complete my homework and submit all assignments on time;  follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  show respect for myself, other people and property;  try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; and   always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The purpose of our Title III program is to provide supplemental direct instruction for our Newcomers, Long-term English Language Learners/ELLs, to attain English language proficiency and meet the same academic standards that the other students are expected to meet. As a school community, we believe in enhancing and in further developing the language and literacy skills of our students. According to Dr. Lily Wong Fillmore, “To learn in school and become an educated person, students must learn to deal with the language in written text.” Providing students with additional support around the importance of unpacking academic language is critical since academic English is a logical, connected discourse that is much more precise in reference than ordinary spoken language. English Language Learners need further support in understanding that information is delivered with grammatical devices that allow a lot of meaning or “unpacking the language.” By focusing in on academic English, students will be given the additional strategies to ensure that they are academically prepared for College and Careers. We want to ensure that our ELL families feel included and supported so that they may become active members of our school community and the community at large. Subgroups/grade levels to be served:The data inquiry team has analyzed all the data concerning ELLs and has determined that ELLs require supplemental services to achieve proficiency to meet the New York State Core Standard in Language Arts and Mathematics. The New York State ELA , Pearson and MOSL tests results show that ELLs are weak in the following literacy skills: third graders are weak in finding the main idea and important details, fourth graders are weak in drawing conclusions and making inferences, and fifth graders are weak in comparing and contrasting on one topic from multiple sources. Therefore, the Title III will focus on developing these comprehension skills three times a week. Instruction is provided in flexible groupings to maximize student performance. Whole-group instruction or heterogeneous grouping may be used when the objectives are appropriate for the range of learners in the classroom. Homogeneous grouping may be used to customize specific instruction for assessed student needs. accommodate and reflect student progress and instructional objectives (flexible and dynamic grouping). Tutoring (peer or adult or both) is used judiciously to supplement (not supplant) explicit teacher-delivered instruction. It aligns with classroom objectives and instruction. Cross-class or cross-grade grouping is used when appropriate to maximize opportunities to tailor instruction to students’ performance levels. This grouping is appropriate because it facilitates teaching students within a similar age span and achievement range. Centers and independent activities are used judiciously and are aligned with instructional goals and objectives focused on achieving grade-level standards. The Title III After-School program for ELLs will target the upper grade ELLs from 3-5. 15 ELLs and former ELLs in grade 5, 9 ELLs in grade4, and 12 ELLs in grade 3, including those former ELLs in the upper grades who recently tested out of the NYSESLAT. This program will commence in October 2018 and end in April 2019. The program will meet three times per week from Tuesday through Friday, two hours per session. Also, this program will hold Group size and composition are adjusted to 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information professional developments for teachers and other staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. Strategies and approaches to help the ELLs achieve proficiency will be tackled and discussed. Parents will be regularly informed of their children’s performance in their native language whenever possible. Schedule/Duration: After school program - Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday (3:30-5:30pm) Teacher A will take the 5th Grade ELLs and former ELLs Teacher B will take the 4th Grade ELLs and former ELLs Teacher C will take the 3rd Grade ELLs and former ELLs Language of Instruction/# Certified Teachers Currently, PS 48 has two fully certified English as a New Language/ENL teachers who work from Monday through Friday and English is the main language of instruction. The ENL teachers together with the Teacher Center Coordinator and the certified Teacher with Bilingual extension will plan together effective approaches and strategies to help our ELLs achieve proficiency in the target language. They will be serving the upper grade ELLs based on the above schedule. Types of materials The program will utilize Ready New York by Curriculum Associates. This program was built to be true to the details and intent of the Common Core Learning Standards, Ready New York is a rigorous instruction and practice program that fully prepares students for the CCLS in a highly supportive way. It's an out-of-the box solution that teachers can start using right away, because it provides them with step-by-step, point-of-use professional development to help them teach the standards most effectively. The Ready® New York CCLS English Language Arts program uses a proven-effective, gradual-release model that ensures students get the modeled and guided instruction they need to build conﬁdence and mastery on the CCLS, while providing point-of-use professional development for teachers to help them teach the CCLS most effectively. Additionally, the program will also utilize the Reading Street Common Core that will help the teachers prioritize instruction to support higher levels of reading and writing, like increase text complexity in reading, provide accessible rigor, balance fiction and informational texts, build content-area knowledge, emphasize close reading, focus on informative/explanatory, argumentative/opinion, and narrative writing, implement performance assessments, and integrate media and 21st century skills. Further, because writing matters for success in the school, the community, and the workplace, School -wide, Inc.'s Writing Fundamentals Program will be used for it has a central mission to improve student writing and learning by increasing the tools teachers can use to teach writing. Writing Fundamentals, created by School-wide, Inc., is a teaching resource that will help educators raise the quality of their students' writing. Writing Fundamentals is made up of a ready-to-use writing curriculum, along with the most essential books from School-wide, Inc.'s writing craft and genre studies set, as well as additional texts which match the strategies taught. The hands-on lessons and accompanying reproducibles, along with the actual texts, provide teachers with the instructional support to teach genre studies and to explore the qualities of good writing with their student writers, from pre-writing to revising and publication. Language Central for Math by Pearson will help ELLs and struggling students, grades 3 - 5, develop the academic vocabulary necessary to master math. Oftentimes it’s the math vocabulary, not the mathematical concepts, that hinder student mastery. Language Central for Math is designed to directly address this issue – and to reinforce the instruction given in the math classroom. Further each student is provided with glossaries in their native language to help them cope with the demands of their respective grades. Also, students will be provided with pictionaries, dictionaries with pictures, so that they better understand the lessons at hand. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Guided reading is a comprehensive reading program that utilizes differentiated instruction with fiction, non-fiction, and content area reading. Guided Reading books will be provided to students. This will enable students to learn skills and strategies that will allow them to read difficult texts that readers can process successfully with supportive instruction. A variety of guided reading books from the Mondo company will be purchased to help students employ a wide range solving strategies and figure out words that they don't know with the ultimate goal of helping students to become fluent independent readers. Wilson Fundation materials will be purchased to help children decipher words, expand vocabulary, and encourage children to recognize text fluently. Additional phonics books, word family books, alphabet letters- pictures sets, Folk & Fairy Tales books, easy readers books, and pictures charts, action words flash cards, sight words flash cards will be purchased to meet the demands of the growing population of newcomers. I pads will be provided to help students build vocabulary and translate texts from other languages. . Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development/PD will consist of a study group in the area of academic literacy for ELLs at no cost to the program. The three participating teachers will analyze and discuss English Learners Academic Literacy and progress. The first meeting will be on October 11, 2018, January 11, 2019 and on April 10, 2019. The purpose of this study will be to identify and put into practice new strategies to best assist ELLs in acquiring skills and academic literacy and get them college ready. The teachers to conduct this study will be the ENL teachers, Mrs. Sanchez-Crespo, Mr. Cekovic and the teacher with Bilingual extension, Mr. Navas, and the content area teacher, Mrs Chan. The hours will be 3-6:00 P.M. on Fridays. Professional development topics to be discussed are: Effective Strategies In Teaching ELLs, Infusing Rigorous Instruction to English Language Learners, The Writing Process, Features of Effective Writing for ELA, Sharpening Math Problem Solving Skills. We will turnkey to teachers who have ELLs in their classes. ENL teachers will attend workshops provided by the network and the Department of English Language Learners. This ongoing professional development is conducted to extend academic support to teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms and also based on the needs analysis conducted early in the school year. Also, PDs will address questions and concerns that are common to all classroom teachers with ELLs. The ENL teachers/Teacher Center coordinator who attend monthly staff development provided by the network are available to assist the classroom teachers through staff development initiatives. Our goal is to arm the classroom teachers with the tools and strategies that they will need to serve the English Language Learner population in their respective classrooms. Records, agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained and kept in the ENL room, Rm. 401. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is often seen as a cornerstone in a child's education. Active participation is crucial for the success of the ELLs. At P.S. 48 we collaborate with Parents to ensure that scholars have a supportive learning environment at school and at home. We host workshops to equip parents with strategies and resources to help their children at home and be part of their educational process. This upcoming year Parental involvement will consist of the following events. On September 18, 2018 a school wide parent night is scheduled. Our ENL team will make parents aware of available community based ELL resources as well as other ways to reinforce their learning at home. In addition, as part of parent engagement we will host a workshop in December 2018. This workshop will focus in teaching parents how to maintain positive communication with their children. Later, the Title III groups will make a presentation to the parents to celebrate students' accomplishments. The mathematics workshop will take place on February 14, 2019 from 9:00 to 10:00 A. M. led by the ENL teachers, Ms.Sanchez-Crespo and Mr. Cekovic All Title III students and teachers will participate. All parents of ELLs will be invited to both events. Letters and fliers in English, Bengali, Spanish, French and Arabic will be sent via the students. Follow up phone calls will be made. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name William Wordsworth School Borough Queens School Number 48 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patricia Mitchell Coach Dorothy Cush ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Etelvina Sanchez-Crespo Teacher/Subject Area Kema Bailey/Science Teacher/Subject Area Parent Coordinator Related-Service Provider Yasmin Torres Superintendent IEP Assistant Principal Vanessa Christensen Coach Rochelle Whichard School Counselor Gissel Uzhca Parent Christopher Saint-Wilkerson Parent Coordinator Cecilia Vellozo Field Support Center Staff Member Mabel-Munez-Sarduy Other (Name and Title) 2 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 612 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 84 Total number of ELLs Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): 13.73% ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.16% K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Our school is using Fountas and Pinnell to measure the reading skills of our ELLs and the entire school. Running records allow our scholars reading performance to be leveled.. At P.S 48, the running record is done 5 times throughout the school year. The first running record is performed in October. It shows us the reading proficiency level of scholars upon entrance.. Then we test scholars to measure their reading levels improvement and Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 61 2018-19 CEP 57  0 0 0 0 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 gather data to set the stage for academic reform. Recent data shows reading proficiency as follow: Kindergarten 91%, first grade 100%, and second grade 94%. Grade 3 shows 60%, fourth grade 70% and fifth grade shows 60% of growth in reading proficiency. 0 0 0 0 0 0 61 61 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In our school we utilize the co-teaching model where teachers work together to develop small group instruction based on student needs and performance. The co-teaching model allows teachers to share strategies and work side by side to develop differentiated lessons that have the same target goals and CCLS but different scaffolds to help scholars reach the particular standard or skill. In addition, during Guided reading teachers provide explicit and direct instruction to group of three to five students who are the same reading level.Teachers select a text for the group that is just slightly more challenging than students' current independent reading level and is considered within their of proximal development. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Summative tests such as Periodic ELL ELA and Math assessments are given to students after each unit to measure the progress of the standards being taught. It indicates the progress and the areas that needs to be re taught. All scholars also take part in the NYC MOSL baseline , mid-year, and end-of-year assessment that demonstrates student's performance and growth. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to develop instruction that meets targeted skills or standards that scholars demonstrated limited proficiency in. The ENL teacher pushes into the classroom and works in small groups. This allows ENL scholars to receive additional support for necessary skills while still being in their classroom learning environment. In addition, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers analyze summative assessment data which is the main tool these teachers utilize to form small groups. This is particularly evident with Running Record data that the ENL teacher and classroom teachers evaluate to notice trends and build reading groups to bridge the learning gap. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During the initial screening of ELLS their parents fill in the Home Language Survey, The Home language survey help us to determine ENL eligibility. Next, we administer the NYSITELL to determine student's language proficiency and the hours of service. Later, ECLAS/Fountas and Pinnell, ELL ELA and Math periodic assessments provide us with data to guide instruction. Based on this data, teachers determine the students who may be at risk of doing poorly or struggle in specific areas, then the teacher will design an intervention core where there is collaboration and engagement around rigorous content with meaningful lessons that foster conversation, dialogue, questioning and sharing ideas and knowledge may be applied as needed. 2018-19 CEP 58  In our school a bilingual ENL teacher has created an intervention progra to address students in grades 3-5 who need support in phonemic awareness, decoding, and literacy skills. Students progress is monitored throughout the school year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Aside from the state mandated NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, AND LAB R. exams, we administer teacher criterion type of assessments such as: MOSL, running records, exit ticket, anecdotal logs, and scholars portfolios. For instance, the NYSITELL determine language proficiency upon entrance and minutes of service scholars are entitled to. The NYSESLAT result shows us the language proficiency progress of the scholars during the school year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. During common preps the ENL teacher and classroom teachers develop data charts which are used to notice trends for our ELL learners across the grades. Based on our assessments and trends noticed, we develop small groups instruction, we gather strategies from successful teachers and share out how we can implement instruction from those teachers to teachers whose scholars demonstrated limited growth. During Mondays PD the ENL teachers share out best practice methods and strategies that will particularly support scholars in each class based on the areas they demonstrated limited proficiency in. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At PS 48 all English language learners are grouped heterogeneously. There are no ENL self-contained classes. All English language learners are serviced using the "push -in / pull-out" organizational model program. ENL teacher "pushes in" in the morning for ELA integrated instruction and "pulls-out" in the afternoon. The students travel by class as a group to receive pull -out English- acquisition -focused instruction in either English or Math. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We don't have a bilingual program in our school so this doesn't apply to us. b. TBE program. If applicable. We don't have a DL program in our school, so this doesn't apply to us. c. DL program. If applicable. At PS 48 we have two ENL Teachers. Mrs. Sanchez-Crespo services grades K-2. and Ms. Johnson services grades 3-5. The Entering and Emerging ELLS receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. Both ENL teachers provide 8 periods a week to meet the criteria. In the morning ENL teacher services through the push-in model program and in the afternoon pull-out program. Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of weekly; students receive 4 periods weekly, 2 of them as a push-in and 2 periods as pull-out. Commanding level students receive 90 minutes weekly, 2 periods as a push-in program model. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 59  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? If a scholar is pulled out during content areas like Social Studies, instruction focuses on the language of content area to make the lesson more meaningful to the students. The ENL teacher can begin by reviewing a content area lesson and identifying not just the vocabulary that every student need to know , but other vocabulary words and grammar structure that ELLs may not be familiar with. Build on ELLs' background knowledge to increase comprehension by using KWL chart, or by asking specific questions about a topic, chart with the targeted content words, the word meaning chart that includes a picture next to the word, or simply introducing a topic by viewing a video are effective strategies to foster language and develop competencies to meet the Commo Core Learning Standards. In addition, the ENL teacher models using content area vocabulary word in a sentence and then scholars write their own sentences. These scaffolding strategies are used so that the scholar can comprehend the text, build schema, and create a bridge that would allow scholars to make connection with the new knowledge. During Push-in program Model the ENL teacher comes into the general education to support Ells during content area instruction. The ENL teacher may support Ells in a mini Lesson, using closed reading strategies, summarizing story, introducing vocabulary with pictures, building background knowledge, and charts. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At the beginning, those children who speak Spanish and tested in are also administered the Spanish LAB to ascertain their fluency in the native language. Consequently, these students can also take the state tests in their native language which also apply to students who speak other languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Currently, there are no SIFE in the building but if ever one came along, the ENL teacher is prepared to put the student in a rigorous academic program to help him/her transition smoothly into the mainstream classroom. Reading programs like and Reading for Fluency and also, online programs like Starfall will be ready whenever a SIFE student enters the building. Instruction for newcomers involves a Holistic approach where the four modalities of learning are integrated like speaking, listening, reading and writing. The ENL teacher supports newcomers utilizing Reading Fundations program, explicit instruction, thinking aloud during instructional activities, using anchor charts, graphic organizers, realia, TPR, Teachertube website, and Starfall website. For the developing ells we offer scholars the after school program Reading Alliance. Reading Alliance is designed to give scholars the support they need to reach higher reading levels through explicit reading instruction and practice. For the long term ELL's, teachers develop units with embedded language and literacy skills which teacher teach across all subjects. Instruction is further differentiated by the use of "Reading Partners" (a community based organization that helps them master basic reading skills through one on one kid friendly instruction. Exposing them to language used symbolically which requires complex thought processes. Students will be exposed to different reading strategies like repeated reading, assisted reading, closed reading, visualized/verbalized reading, open ended questions about the text and reciprocal teaching wherein they will be given the chance to summarize, ask questions, clarify and predict. Likewise, Former ELLS are supported by intensive coaching in reading comprehension, and opportunities to engage in academic class discussions therefore developing academic content related oral fluency. Additionally, the ENL teacher and the general education teacher provide and expose ELL'S to different writing skills like mechanics and demonstrating revision, editing, elaboration, conventions, and conferencing with scholars individually. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 CEP 60  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status K-2 grade receive Wilson Foundation instruction which is critical foundation program emphasizing phonemic awareness, word study, reading fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension strategies. In addition, for lower grades ELLs, The ENL teacher uses Guided reading Instruction to improve text comprehension with activities and routines to support reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Also to promote vocabulary acquisition, in the content areas. For upper grade ELL, we use Expeditionary Learning, and Reading Street program which are aligned to the Common core standards, helping us prioritize instruction to support higher levels of reading and writing through increased text complexity in reading, providing accessible rigor, balanced fiction and informational texts, built content-area knowledge, emphasized close reading, focused on informative/explanatory, argumentative/opinion, and narrative writing, implemented performance assessments, and integrated media and 21st century skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our schools use curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to support our Ells -SWD by organizing themes and strand that connect the curriculum across subject areas in which teachers use small group instruction, provide differentiated strategies according to students' learning needs such as: hand signal, vocabulary picture cards, electronic device, dry eraser boards, peer support, and provide students multiples opportunities to produce language and become an independent learner. The special education teacher, ENL teacher and general education teacher plan collaboratively throughout the year to analyze IEPs and together develop strategies, share resources, share responsibility and accountability to increase educational opportunities . Together we ensure that all ELLs with IEPs are given all the accommodations such as small group instruction, separate location, time extension, oral translation to attain English proficiency and to achieve their IEP goals, etc.. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Aside the content classroom instruction at PS 48 we have in placed the RTI Tier program (Response to Intervention ) all scholars including ELLS whose performance is below grade levels. RTI (Response Intervention Program) happens during instructional time, in which scholars are grouped according to their needs in different tiers. Tier 1 is supplemental and is meant to enhance the core program for all students. Tier 2 is to be used to prevent or mediate skills deficit for students who are below grade level. Tier 3 is to be used intensively for students who are significantly below grade level. scholars in tier 3 get pull out in groups of two or three to strategically work in the desire skills . In addition, we have reading partners program. Partners are trained people who deliver individualized one- on one tutoring, twice a week for 45 minutes following a structured curriculum. Also, Title II Reading Alliance after school program for grades K-2 which commence in November. All upper grade ELLS will be encouraged to attend the Title III after school program. There is no targeted intervention program for ELL subgroup alone but there is a targeted intervention program for at-risk students, i.e. students including ELLS who scored level 1's and 2's in Math and ELA. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. New programs like Wilson Reading Foundation Program, and the Reading Allegiance programs, will be included the upcoming school year because they have been effective in development of language acquisition. All programs which the ENL and the classroom teachers have been using in particular and the whole school in general will be continued with the addition of those mentioned beforehand because they have been proven to help our ELLs achieve proficiency. All ELLs have access to all programs offered by the school. All students including ELLs are informed by sending a letter home usually in their native language whenever available, letting them know all the after-school programs available to their students 2018-19 CEP 61  like Title III and also programs like sports, arts, drama and music. The Title III after-school program is especially designed to cope with the needs of ELLs. This is available from Monday to Wednesday every week from 3pm to 5pm. ELLs from 3rd to 5th grades are exposed to different reading and writing skills and given strategies to deal with these difficulties. To engage our ELLS P.S. 48 has invested money in purchasing instructional materials to support all academic needs. In order to enhance instruction in English with native language support, the Teacher Center has created a multicultural library consisting of literature from different parts of the world. Our students’ culture and cultural experiences are vital components when we are creating our lessons. Additional materials used to support ELLS are realia, visual aids (charts, word walls, pictures, big books), educational games, and math manipulatives. All students at P.S. 48 are actively engaged in the use of technology throughout the day. Our ELLS have the opportunity to utilize laptops found in their classrooms to differentiate their learning. Teachers use visual aids on the computer and Smart-boards to help students gain an understanding of concepts being taught throughout the curriculum. The Smart Board located in each of the classrooms, allows ELLS to interact not only visually but kinesthetically. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All programs and services which have been available will be continued. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All ELLs have access to all programs offered by the school. All students including ELLs are informed by sending a letter home usually in their native language whenever available, letting them know all the after-school programs available to their students like Title III and also programs like sports, arts, drama and music. The Title III after-school program is especially designed to cope with the needs of ELLs. This is available from Monday to Wednesday every week from 3pm to 5pm. ELLs from 3rd to 5th grades are exposed to different reading and writing skills and given strategies to deal with these difficulties. Currently, all ELLs have access to the online reading programs like Starfall and math programs like Cool Math. Beginner ELLs are usually exposed to a lot of language through online programs like Starfall. Also, there is an ongoing Reading for Fluency program which is used for listening strategies and guided reading to prepare ELLs to become independent readers and learners. The school is planning to purchase the Accelerated Reader program which has been proven to help ELLs nationwide to read and comprehend. Further, the school is purchasing the leapfrog to help the newly-admits and newcomers read and improve their performance in the classroom. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. To engage our ELLs, P.S. 48 has invested money in purchasing instructional materials to support all academic needs. In order to enhance instruction in English with native language support, the Teacher Center has created a multicultural library consisting of literature from different parts of the world. Our students’ culture and cultural experiences are vital components when we are creating our lessons. Additional materials used to support ELLs are realia, visual aids (charts, word walls, pictures, big books), educational games, and math manipulatives. All students at P.S. 48 are actively engaged in the use of technology throughout the day. Our ELLS have the opportunity to utilize laptops found in their classrooms to differentiate their learning. Teachers use visual aids on the computer and Smart-boards to help students gain an understanding of concepts being taught throughout the curriculum. The Smart Board located in each of the classrooms, allows ELLs to interact not only visually but kinesthetically. : 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Due to the various different languages and dialects of our scholars, we are unable to assess their home language because we do not have translators or methods to assess all the languages. However, we foster their home language by sharing books on MYON, our online reading/listening program, that are in various different languages. We also support ENL scholars with with 2018-19 CEP 62  materials at home. All ELLs are provide with glossaries to help them in their academic growth. Also, teachers are encouraged to use visuals and google translations whenever translations are not available. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher utilizes the NYSITELL to identify the language proficiency upon entrance. The ENL teacher shares this data with classroom teachers to help develop groupings of learners. This assessment also helps the teachers understand where the learner is with the language. The assessment scores are kept in mind by the ENL teacher and classroom teachers when developing Common Core aligned assessments and instructional plans. The ENL teacher also provides classroom teachers with materials that address the needs of the learners based on that exam. This includes materials such as magazines, sight word cards, picture dictionaries, vocabulary and supportive language websites, etc.. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. To engage our ELLs, P.S. 48 has invested money in purchasing instructional materials to support all academic needs. In order to enhance instruction in English with native language support, the Teacher Center has created a multicultural library consisting of literature from different parts of the world. Our students’ culture and cultural experiences are vital components when we are creating our lessons. Additional materials used to support ELLs are realia, visual aids (charts, word walls, pictures, big books), educational games, and math manipulatives. All students at P.S. 48 are actively engaged in the use of technology throughout the day. Our ELLs have the opportunity to utilize laptops found in their classrooms to differentiate their learning. Teachers use visual aids on the computer and Smartboards to help students gain an understanding of concepts being taught throughout the curriculum. The Smart Board located in each of the classrooms, allows ELLs to interact not only visually but kinesthetically. : 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, we provide information to families about summer school that is specifically designed for ELL learners. In addition, for newly-enrolled ELLs, we have devised a buddy program wherein the newly-enrolled ELL is paired with an old ELL or a former ELL that speak his/her language making the new ELLs comfortable. This helps the newly-enrolled ELL with understanding systematic and safety routines such as bathrooms, school routines, locations of critical school support people, etc.. As our ELL population grows, our teacher are responding by developing parent workshops during our Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays. These workshops will focus on how parents can help reading proficiency at home, what materials can be used for such as flash cards, websites, etc.. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time, we have no language electives offered to ELLS except English with native language support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We don't have a DL program in our school, so this doesn't apply to us. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? ENL teacher supports the staff in several ways. The ENL teacher provides data to the teachers on their current students. The ENL teacher has an open door policy for staff members who may want to articulate concerns and questions about their new ELL students. When concerns would arise, the ENL teacher would supply classroom teachers with strategies and materials to bridge language acquisition with grade 2018-19 CEP 63  level curriculum. Recently the ENL teachers presented a workshop on how to maximize language development. On this workshop they spoke about language acquisition, the learner direct speech should encompass BIC and CALP, (Bloom's Taxonomy modalities), word order development, and strategies to integrate academic language on daily activities. Currently, ENL teacher are planning their next workshop on Checking for Comprehension in the spring 2018. PDs offered to ENL Teachers were lined up for this school year include: September: Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Program, November: Building Academic Language through word study, January Online Program: How to Support ELLS and March: Purposeful Planning. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff are provided with the list of schools that ELLS can transition to guiding them how to write application letters to schools they selected themselves. All teachers will receive training on serving ELLS. Professional development requirements would be 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for All Teachers • 50% total hours ELL-specific PD for Bilingual Education and ENL/ESL teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parents involvement meetings take place three times at year. During the Winter meeting Parent of ELLs' students discussed funding, programs and how to help their children to improve academic achievement. We provided parents with a list of how funding was distributed for different purposes, a description and explanation of the curriculum in use, the forms of academic assessments used to measure student progress and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. In addition, all Tuesdays we have parent engagement time. During this time parents have meeting/conferences wherein to talk about their students' academic growth and usually the school provides an interpreter in a language that the parent has requested. Teachers take this opportunity to provide sight words flash cards, websites, dictionary and resources. Also teachers communicate with parents using class Dojo App, and journals. Currently we are working in creating workshops to encourage parent involvement for the upcoming school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In our school we foster parent involvement by providing workshops and materials to help them to work with their children. For example in our last workshop the ENL teachers modeled how to instruct students through read aloud. A list of comprehension question and mastery skills, books, flash cards, and Common Core Standards were provided. Furthermore, the school has lined up several activities to involve parents like curriculum nights, Saturday conferences, PTA meetings, International Food Festival to involve parents in the schools activities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Right now, we don't have additional information that we think is relevant to the LAP. 2018-19 CEP 64  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Patricia M. Mitchell 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Wordsworth School, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 28Q48 School DBN: Patricia Mitchell Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 02/18/18 Other 02/18/18 Other 02/18/18 Other 02/18/18 Signature Name (PRINT) 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 02/18/18 ELL Compliance Specialist IEP Teacher Teacher Teacher Date (mm/dd/yy) Vanessa Christensen Christopher Saint-Wilkerson Etelvina Sanchez-Crespo Natalie Capers Kema Bailey Barry Hauptman/Technology Gissel Uzhca Mabel Munez Sarduy Yasmin Torres Belinda Lewis Rochelle Whichard Jennifer Barry 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28 School Name: William Wordsworth School Superintendent: 48 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Etelvina Sanchez-Crespo ENL Teacher conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Every parent is given the Home Language Identification Survey to ascertain what language they read and understand. It is available in nine languages. A phone interpretation hot line is accessible for less prevalent languages. A licensed ENL pedagogue is always on hand to assess the new student for the necessity of English as a new language services. Ms. Fernandez is the school's appointed translator in Spanish. Mrs. Sanchez-Crespo also assists with Spanish translation. Ms. Jean-Felix, and Mrs.Yorke are the interpreters/ translators for the Haitian Creole parent population. We also have Bengali speaking staff who help as the need arises.. Ms. Vellozo assists with the Arabic translations. Parent volunteers are also on hand for Punjabi and Fulani translations. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 68 Percent Oral Language Written Preferred Arabic Fulani Yoruba French Arabic Fulani Yoruba French Haitian Creole Haitain Creole Mandingo Mandingo Bengali Pashto Punjabi Spanish Bengali Pashto Punjabi Spanish Percent Written Oral Preferred Arabic Fulani Yoruba French Haitian -Creole Mandingo Bengali Pashto Punjabi Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school issues a monthly newsletter informing parents of the activities in school which are duly translated in Spanish and Bengali. Monthly 2018-19 CEP 69  At the beginning of the year, we sent letters to parents informing them of the after-school offerings which are duly translated in their native language. Annual International Festival Invitation June On site translator/interpreters Evaluation request letters Ongoing On site translators 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher conferences September2017 On site staff translators November 2017 March 2018 May 2018 Ongoing Registration, application and selection form ELL Parent Orientation Ongoing On site Video orientation in parent's preferred language Special Education /IEP Conference Ongoing On site staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency we utilize our phone master to reach parents. Each ELL scholar is teamed up with an ENL Teacher who will communicate with parents in case of an emergency. We have several entities that will translate for us, We also utilize our partner school District 75 translator services and on site translators. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 70  During staff development time the staff participate in a workshop to learn, read and revise the goal of Chancellor 's regulation A663. Additionally, Parent coordinators and school- based personnel attend the translation interpretation unit for periodic training. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We fulfill the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by distributing each parent whose primary language is covered language and whose require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and responsibility which include their right regarding translation and interpretation services. In addition, postings and letters sent home are translated by in-house staff interpreter, Also, The CBO (Community Based Organization)offer workshops and training for our English language learners parents to provide them with latest information and changes in the school community. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We conduct annual parent surveys at the beginning of the year and at the end of the school year to ensure that parents fully understood the services and programs the school provides and to gather information on how can we assist them better or improve our services. 2018-19 CEP 71 
