2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 27Q051 P.S. 051 Principal: MAGDALY SAINT-JUSTE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 51Q 342700010051 Pre-K, K, 1 School Number (DBN): 27Q051 87-45 117 th Street Richmond Hill, NY 11418 718-850-0738 718-850-0830 Phone Number: Fax: Magdaly Saint-Juste MSaintJ@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Magdaly Saint-Juste Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lori Gandelman DeidraRamirez Lynne Young Maria Naula N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard Ozone Park, NY 11416 JAmbert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: Marlene Wilks MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-642-5855 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Magdaly Saint-Juste Lori Gandelman DeidraRamirez Rosanne Antz Maria Naula N/A N/A N/A LynneYoung Cynthia Jawulski AmrahMahmood Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/NA Member/ School Member/ School Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TejinderKaur Stephanie Berrios Walter Lin N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent N/A Member/N/A Member/N/A Member/N/A Member/N/A Member/N/A 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is as follows: "Public School 51Q strives to create the best opportunity for all students to learn in a nurturing and intellectually rigorous environment. Our entire school community commits to providing excellence in education and to developing a community of lifelong learners and critical thinkers who will make meaningful contributions to their world. In an atmosphere rich with cultural diversity, we set the highest academic standards for our students in all curricular areas and celebrate individuality and creativity." 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 51Q is a Pre-K to Grade 1 school in Richmond Hill. After completing Grade 1 at our school, the majority of our students transition to PS 56Q, a Grade 2 to Grade 5 school four blocks away from PS 51Q. The school’s population is a reflection of the community. It is diverse in language, ethnicity, and socio-economic status. During the 2017-2018 school year, we collaborated with Queens College for two student teacher programs: one for prospective early childhood teachers, and the second for prospective English as a New Language (ENL) teachers. This collaboration continues during the 2018-2019 school year as we currently have four early childhood teachers scheduled assigned to our school for the fall semester. We also collaborate with St John's University's Service Learning Program which allows students with various career interests to volunteer in our school for as little as one period per week. Our visual arts program was particularly successful during the 2017-2018 school year. One of our Grade 1 students participated in the fourth annual Queens Borough Arts Festival with his work "Landscape with Waterfall, Train and Cars", and a second Grade 1 student’s work, “Landscape with Suns”, is included in the P.S. Art 2018 exhibition at The Metropolitan Museum of Art. P.S. Art will be on exhibit at The Metropolitan Museum of Art from June to October, and then will move on to the Tweed Courthouse where it will be on display during the fall semester. Along with Landscape with Suns being on display from June to October at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was one of 27 images from the exhibition that were featured on outdoor digital screens in the heart of Times Square from June 17, 2018 to June 21, 2018, courtesy of the Times Square Advertising Coalition (TSAC.) We plan to submit more student creations during the 2018-2019 school year. Our school participated in the Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP), and in the Teachers College Writing Project (TCWP) for the first time in 2017-2018. For CARP, we considered the impact of sight word knowledge and of the implementation of rigorous reading strategies on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. The work done by the CARP team also extended to the other classrooms in the building. For the TCWP, the principal and three designated teachers attended rigorous workshops in writing at Teachers College, and spearheaded a revamping of the writing program at the school. Both the CARP and the TCWP initiatives are continuing for the 2018-2019 school year. Finally, the principal participated in an Emotional Intelligence Leadership Series offered by the district. This was a first step towards making social emotional learning integral to our mission. We will continue to refine our use of the Sanford Harmony social emotional program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There are two significant sub-groups at PS 51Q. English Language Learners (ELL) and students with special needs. During the 2017-18 school year, the percentage of English Language Learners enrolled in grades K and 1 was 23.4%. This year, it is 23.7% The students who were identified as ELLs largely came from two ethnic backgrounds: Hispanics (47.9%) and Asians (24.1%). Our second special student population are those with an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) at 7.7%. Most of our students with special needs were enrolled in least restrictive settings: 14% were enrolled in an Integrated Collaborative Teaching setting (ICT), while the rest received either Related Services only (RS),4%. Parents of our special needs students and of our ELLs receive workshops tailored for their specific needs. We believe that the school's SIT focus on quality IEPs made those legal documents easier for parents to navigate and to track their children's goals, as well as giving them specific ways in which they can help their children at home. During the 2018-2019 school year, we are working to ensure that all of our students, particularly our ELLs, SWDs and SWD-ELLs continue to make significant progress in the academic areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  All teachers who were invited to respond to the School Survey did so, giving us a School Survey response rate of 100%. One-hundred and fifty-nine of the parents responded to the School Survey, which is a School Survey response rate of 74%. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017-2018, the score for Rigorous Instruction was the highest at 4.76, followed for that of Effective School Leadership at 4.52. While these rankings are similar to those received during the 2016-2017 school year, both of those scores are higher than they were the previous school year. The lowest score was on Collaborative Teachers at 3.70, which is a decrease from the 2016-2017 school year. Strong Family Ties and Trust scored respectively at 4.32 and 4.45, a significant increase over the 2016-2017 scores (3.96 and 3.99). This year, we will continue to strengthen our rigorous instructional practices by implementing our second year of the Teacher's College Writing Program and to improve on collaborative practices by expanding learned in our first year of the Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP). 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q051 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 244 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 70.5% % Reduced Lunch 27.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.9% 45.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.25 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 26 91.1% 9.4% 9.4% 2.9% 27.9% 7.4% 0 12% 3.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our goal for the 2017-year was that by June 2018, 65% of all Grade K and 1 students at levels 1 and 2 in reading and writing who were continuously enrolled at PS 51Q from October 1, 2017 to June 1, 2018 would improve by at least one level in reading and writing as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments System and NYC DOE tasks results. We also administered the NYC DOE Writing and Math Tasks to our students. We exceeded our reading expectations with 83% of the identified students reaching improving by at least one proficiency level on the third Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments. We used the DOE Writing Task as an assessment, and there, we also exceeded our expectations with 94% of our students improving by at least one proficiency level when comparing the third benchmark results to the first benchmark results. The math results in particular continue to vastly differ from the results on the Go Math Assessments. Our students performed significantly better on the Go Math End-of-Year assessments than on the DOE EOY Math Task. We will continue to specifically address the needs of all students, particularly ELLs, SWD, and ELLs-SWD in ELA (reading and writing). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all Grade K and 1 non-ELL students at levels 1 and 2 in reading who were administered the first Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and are continuously enrolled at PS 51Q to June 1, 2018 will improve by at least one proficiency level as evidenced by results on the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments System, 3rd Edition. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will focus on guided reading as part of their action research work in CARP. Teachers will engage in book study specific to reading, such as The Reading Strategies Book-Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Readers by Jennifer Serravallo. The Grade K teachers and will be more smoothly integrated in the CARP initiatives. Teachers will continue to use a rigorous ELA curriculum to address the needs of all students by focusing on another component of balanced literacy, shared reading. Teachers will participate in professional learning activities, and will implement the school's shared reading guidelines. ELA lessons will be delivered in a variety of modalities to address the needs of the whole class as well as the needs of groups and individual students. In the classroom setting, teachers will use Fountas and Pinnell data to conduct guided reading for specific groups of students and monitor their progress through running records. Teachers will also identify struggling readers for possible intervention in either the classroom or out of the classroom, using programs such as the Great Leaps reading intervention program, Literacy Intervention System, and Recipe for Reading, an intervention that specifically targets SWDs. The teachers will modify resources and use writing conferences to address the needs of the ELLs and SWDs. The school will use Title III funds for an afterschool program for ELLs and other struggling students where reading and writing skills will be further developed. Teachers will plan to meet with all parents of students in their classrooms, not only at parent-teacher conferences but also throughout the year. AIS teachers will meet with parents to explain their intervention approach, and will give parents an opportunity to observe their sessions. Strategies which are successful with SWDs will also be shared with their parents. Teachers will use Literacy Fridays to model for parents how to develop and nurture their children’s literacy skills. The school will encourage reading through twice a year book fairs, parent workshops, and special events such as Read-Me-A-Story Night planned around the author Mo Willems. Teachers will also plan workshops for parents to help them take advantage of everyday opportunities for their children to write. Teachers will also plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers in Grades K and 1 Sept 2018-June 2019 CARP Coach Instructional Coach Classroom Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal Instructional Coach Grade Leaders Principal Instructional Coach Grade Leaders Reading Recovery Teacher Parents of all students in Grade K and October 2018-June 2019 Instructional Coach Teachers Grade 1 Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 14 for and invite parents to workshops specifically about the NYSESLAT. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school schedules literacy and math Friday events throughout the year. Parents are invited into their child's classrooms on the last Friday of the month and have an opportunity to observe a particular skill or strategy that the teacher would like them to feel comfortable using at home. The Read-Me-A Story Night event takes place in March or April. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff : classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, AIS teacher, Reading Recovery Teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, CARP staff Instructional Resources : ReadyGen, Scaffolded Strategies Handbook, Fundations consumables, Simple Solutions consumables for Grade 1 students, Reading Recovery for Grade 1 students, Raz-Kids ; The Reading Strategies Book by Jennifer Serravalo and The grade-level Fountas and Pinnell Shared Reading Collection Schedule Adjustments : 1) During School Hours: a) Two common prep periods weekly to allow teacher-teams to engage in a variety of activities, including but not limited to planning units of study, conducting lesson studies, analyzing data to use for instruction b) Assign out-of-classroom teachers to push into classrooms for the first 15 minutes of the day to provide homework support c) Assign two teachers to provide AIS to Grade K students and/or Reading Recovery to Grade 1 students d) Provide coverage to allow teachers to attend off-site professional learning opportunities 2) After/Before School Hours : 80 minutes of professional development each Monday; 40 minutes of professional time which may include teacher-team meetings each Tuesday; 35 minutes of parent involvement time each Tuesday. Collaborative Action Research meetings once a week either before or after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of all Grade K and 1 non-ELL students at levels 1 and 2 in reading who were administered the first Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and are continuously enrolled at PS 51Q to June 1, 2018 will improve by at least one proficiency level in reading as evidenced by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments System results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, 3rd Edition Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our approach to achieving a Supportive Environment was multifaceted. The principal participated in an Emotional Intelligence Leadership Series offered by the district because of the shared belief that PS 51Q should establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. We continued with the Core Value book of the month program to support social emotional learning, leaving the book Have you Filled a Bucket Today? as a key thread that continued throughout the year. The school also collaborated with ThriveNYC which provided training for teachers, and resources to parents. On the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, the school's results in the area of Classroom behavior were comparable to the City average. The school fared above the city average in the areas of Peer Support for Academic Work, Safety, and Social Emotional Learning. Our CEP goal for the 2017-2018 school year was that by June 2018, 90% of Grades K and 1 students would show evidence of mastery on Sanford Harmony topics used based on the results of Sanford Harmony evaluation checklists administered to the students, we realized that more work needed to be done in this area since more than 90% of Grade 1 students met the criteria and only 80% of Grade K students did. We will continue with the initiatives listed above, as well as with the collaboration with ThriveNYC. Since Classroom Behavior was the area in which the school scored the lowest, we will focus on it for the next school year, including providing more direct support to the teachers in order to positively impact on their students' behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 51Q will have at least three more staff trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) or other social emotional learning programs, as evidence by training certificates. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to use Sanford Harmony professional learning modules that will impact classroom instruction on 1) Building a Safe and Welcoming Learning Environment 2) Investment in Learning 3) Motivation Theory. All PS 51Q Teachers, paraprofessionals, clinicians, school aides, etc. August 2018- Sanford Harmony Trainers June 2019 Instructional Coach Teachers will complete a social emotional learning action plan and will work towards completing the steps on the plan. Teachers will participate in explicit training that address social emotional learning. All PS 51Q Teachers, paraprofessionals, clinicians, school aides, etc. August 2018- June 2019 ENL Teachers Other Teachers All Parents October 2018-June 2019 Principal Instructional Coach Principal All Teachers Instructional Coach Consultants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share with parents the topics that will be addressed every time we start a new Sanford Harmony unit. Parents receive resources to use at home with the Core Value book of the month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : All staff will be trained to participate in Sanford Harmony program and the Core Value Book-of-the-Month program. 2018-19 CEP 18  Instructional Resources : Sanford Harmony Program Program- Core Value Book-of-the-Month Schedule Adjustments : Integrate lessons throughout the curriculum; schedule lessons during assembly time on Mondays- Assess students on core values during assembly time on Mondays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, PS 51Q will have at least one more staff trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) or other social emotional learning programs, as evidence by training certificates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agenda and attendance records, course participation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher- Teams continue were an area in need of improvement according to the PPO conducted by Acting Superintendent Dantona in 2018. It was also one of the school lowest rated component on the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools report. We need to continue to deepen school-wide instructional practices through the strategic facilitation of professional learning so that teachers implement tasks with strategic scaffolds and supports so that all learners engage in appropriately challenging tasks that promote high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion. For the second year, the school will participate in the Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP). While this is a seven-member team, during the 2018-2019, we plan to replicate the CARP model with at least one in-house-only group in order to deepen the work in which our teacher-teams engage. This will lead in improved student results, particularly in the area of mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the teacher team that focuses on mathematics will collaboratively research strategies and activities to implement in the math program leading to 60% of Grade K and 1 students improving by at least one proficiency level when comparing the Beginning of Year and End of Year math benchmark assessments on the Go-Math Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math team members will meet with the original CARP team to establish and/or revisit the norms and protocols that our teams utilize are utilizing to support the inquiry process. Selected Teachers September 2018 Principal Math team members will complete a Needs Assessment plan based on informal and formal math assessments administered during the first two months of school. Selected Teachers Sept 2018-October 2018 Math team members will identify gaps in instruction and in support for various ability groups, and will engage in curriculum revisions, and will plan units and lessons that address these gaps. Grades K and 1 Teachers October 2017-June 2018 Horizontal and vertical teams will meet after each benchmark assessment to analyze results and make school-wide decisions regarding math lesson plans and strategies. Grades K and 1 Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Team members will plan parent friendly instructional activities that are aligned to their work throughout the year. All Parents October 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement CARP Team Members f CARP Staff CARP Team Instructional Coach Grade Leaders Principal CARP Staff CARP Team Instructional Coach Grade Leaders Principal All Classroom Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 21  The School Leadership Team will discuss the team's work. The teachers on the SLT will present the math curriculum to the SLT, and will explain strategies that parents can use at home. Classroom teachers will plan parent friendly instructional activities that are aligned to their work throughout the year during scheduled Math Friday events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff : ENL classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, AIS teacher, Reading Recovery Teacher Instructional Resources : A Handbook for Professional Learning: Research, Resources, and Strategies for Implementation; Number and Operations-Understanding-Strategies-Connections; Number Sense Routines; Principles to Actions Schedule Adjustments : 1) During School Hours: a) Two common prep periods weekly to allow teacher-teams to engage in a variety of activities, including but not limited to planning for and conducting lesson studies, planning for book study, analyzing data to use for instruction b) Provide coverage to allow teachers to attend off-site professional learning opportunities which they will turnkey to their colleagues c) Built-in time for vertical collaboration between Grade 1 ENL teacher and Grade K ENL teacher d) After School Hours: 80 minutes of professional development each Monday; 40 minutes of teacher-team time each Tuesday; 35 minutes of parent involvement time each Tuesday e) Vertical collaboration between teachers at different grade levels Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the teacher team that focuses on mathematics will collaboratively research strategies and activities to implement in the math program leading to 40% of Grade K and 1 students improving by at least one proficiency level when comparing the Beginning of Year and Mid Year math benchmark assessments on the Go-Math Assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  Go-Math Mid Year Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, Effective School Leadership had a positive rating. Indieed, the school's ratings in distinct components was higher than the city average. The lowest rated item was whether or not teachers felt they had an input in choosing instructional materials used in the classrooms. We have in place a a coherent plan for teacher professional development which includes planning, teaching, reflecting, and applying, as well as a consistent cycle of observation, feedback, and observation. For the 2017-2018 school year, all teachers were rated "effective" or "highly effective" in the Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP). Three of the teachers had a highly effective overall rating, and over the course of the school they modeled strategies and lessons for their colleagues. Our goal during the 2017-2018 school year was that by June 2018, the school leader would create and implement a professional development plan that built capacity in three components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching thus resulting in at least three teachers improving one performance level from effective to highly effective in either Component 3b, Component, 3b, Component 3d in at least one formal or informal observation in the content areas of math and writing. Although we met this goal, the fact that we have new teachers joining our staff makes it an important one to keep. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional learning opportunities and of feedback, there will be a 4% increase in teachers receiving a highly effective rating in component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction , as measured by the 2019 end of year summative ratings in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal and teachers will participate in ongoing professional learning activities with CARP that will help teachers develop skills and strategies for using assessment in instruction. Principal Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teacher's College Staff Instructional Coach, Principal All teachers participate in professional learning activities that will lead to the successful implementation of progress monitoring, and of using assessment in instruction. All Teachers in Grades K and 1 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Writing Project Designated Lead Teaches Teachers engage in inquiry cycles about progress monitoring. All Teachers October Instructional Coach Instructional Coach Principal 2018-June 2019 Principal Teacher Effectiveness All Teachers October 2017-June 2018 Teachers will model for parents the strategies that are effective in progress monitoring. All parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will model for parents the strategies that are effective in developing questioning and discussion skills during Literacy/Math Friday sessions and during workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 25  Human Resources : Teachers, instructional coach, principal, Office of Teacher Effectiveness, Danielson Group Instructional Resources : Danielson Framework Clusters, A Handbook for Professional Learning: Research, Resources, and Strategies for Implementation , NYC DOE, Talk About Teaching! Leading Professional Conversations by Charlotte Danielson, Math in Practice, TCRWP Units of Study; The Reading Strategies Book Schedule Adjustment : Create two common preps for Grade K and Grade 1 teachers; implement the 80 minutes of professional development on Mondays, and 35 minutes of teacher-team time on Tuesdays; per session money if available for planning and off site PLO. Provide coverage to allow teachers to participate in off-site training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of professional learning opportunities and of feedback, there will be a 2% increase in teachers receiving a highly effective rating in component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction , as measured by the 2019 end of year summative ratings in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, the school's score on Strong Family and Community Ties was 3.96. This year, our score is 4.32, a notable improvement. For the 2017-2018 school year, the goal was that The School Leadership Team decided to implement alternative ways of communicating with parents in order to increase parental involvement in the school. The CEP goal was that by June 2018, PS 51Q would use a variety of tools such as school website, Class Dojo, messenger system to improve school-home communication and to increase parental involvement, resulting in having at least 5 parents in 100% of our classrooms participating in day-time instructional activities, i.e. monthly math and literacy Fridays, as evidenced by parent attendance logs. We did meet that goal. However, our tools for meeting that goal needed to be adjusted due to the fact that our newly created website did not work until well into the spring. Therefore, our focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be to continue to use or implement communications tools with parents that will result in higher parent levels of parent involvement. Moreover, the parents in the SLT identified two areas where they would like some modifications. First, parents preferred the use of Class Dojo as a the tool for two-way communication. Parents also requested that advanced notice be given regarding the topic for Literacy and Math Fridays, so that they could be gauge whether or not to participate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 51Q will use Class Dojo as a messenger system to improve school-home communication and to increase parental involvement, resulting in having at least 10% of Grade K-1 parents participating in Math and Literacy Fridays, as evidenced by parent attendance logs. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will meet once a month to discuss the focus of Math Friday and Literacy Friday, and to offer follow-up suggestions for parents. All Staff Oct. 2018- June 2019 Instructional Coach The Parent Coordinator and the Technology Point of Contact (POC) will ensure that the school website is updated and that information about Literacy and Math Fridays are posted with details at the beginning of every month starting in October 2018. All Staff Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Three identified Teachers Principal Parent Coordinator Technology POC Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : SLT Members, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parent Association Members Materials/Supplies: Google Apps for Educators Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  By February 2019, PS 51Q will use Class Dojo as a messenger system to improve school-home communication and to increase parental involvement, resulting in having at least 8% of Grades K-1 parents participating in Math and Literacy Fridays, as evidenced by parent attendance logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group; 1:1 (Reading Recoveryand AIS) During the School Day Small Group; 1:1 During the School day Small Group; 1:1 Small Group; 1:1 Small Group; 1:1 During the School day During the School day During the School day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Levels, teachers’ conference notes Mathematics Go Math Assessments Benchmark Assessments Benchmark Assessments Anecdotals Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, Reading Recovery, Recipe for Reading, Great Leaps, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Fundations Double-Dose, Close Reading, Scaffolded Strategies Handbook Go Math Personal Trainer Go Math Reteach Go Math RTI Exemplar Word Problems Repeated reading, Close Reading Repeated reading, Close Reading Sanford Harmony Program Class Dojo Push in, pull out , instructional games and activities, and relevant children’s books 2018-19 CEP 30  2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently nine students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to offer supplemental books, as well as materials to the STH population. We will also help the STH populations with the costs associated with the instructional field trips taken by the school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies Recruitment : If possible, the principal will attend hiring fairs in the summer to recruit and hire suitable candidates for any vacancy that may arise. She will work with colleagues and the ATR Unit as well to identify possible candidates. The principal will also use the Teacher Finder tool as a resource when looking to fill vacancies. Retention : We do not have a retention issue. We lose teachers either through retirement or change of life issues (moving, child rearing, etc.). We have also lost teachers due to budget constraints. We believe that a culture of collaboration that supports new and veteran teachers has served to keep our teachers in our school. We also believe that nurturing teachers' leadership skills will also contribute to retaining them in our building. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The principal and the professional learning team will put in place a professional learning action plan which will reviewed and revised throughout the year. If possible, the principal will continue to allocate funds to allow coverage so that designated teachers can attend workshops given by the DOE’s Central Office, the Queens South Borough Field Support Center, the OELLs, Teacher's College, and consultants. The teachers who attend those activities will turnkey the information to their colleagues. Paraprofessionals also attend the 80 minutes of professional development on Mondays, and will be released for off-site professional development offered by the DOE’s Central Office. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The parent coordinator, the Pre-K social worker, and the Pre-K teachers have a transition workshop for parents. The principal always schedules a Kindergarten Open House in the spring, as well as a Kindergarten Orientation for prospective Kindergarten parents. The Pre-K teachers attend professional development sessions with Kindergarten teachers throughout the year to ensure that the Pre-K curriculum will prepare students for Kindergarten and beyond. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the end of the year, the teacher teams meet vertically and horizontally to make decisions about curriculum and assessments . Moreover, the school's PLO committee doubles as a MOSL committee and is responsible for looking at assessments and sharing with the principal pros and cons of various assessments that are either already in use in the school or that are being considered for use in the school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 97,569 76,388 12,366 0 1,414,790 X X X N/A X Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 36  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 51Q School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 51Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 51Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 40  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 51Q is an early childhood school that serves students in Grade PK to Grade 1. Therefore, PS 51Q does not have any testing grades to support with Title III funds. Our overarching goal at PS 51Q is that all our Grade 1 students meet the CCLS standards for their grade before moving on to our sister school, PS 56Q. (PS 56Q is the school that our students attend from Grade 2 to Grade 5.) In order to do that, our Grade 1 ELLs need to quickly acquire skills that will lead them to English language proficiency. The supplemental program at PS 51Q is rigorously designed to meet the needs of our English Language Learner (ELL) population, including those of subgroups such as ELLs with special needs, ELLs who have recently arrived to the United States, and ELLs who scored at the Advanced level on their previous NYSESLAT exam. A critical component of the supplemental program is the afterschool program which addresses the development of oral language skills, reading and writing skills, and listening and speaking skills. We plan to invite 15 Grade 1 ELLs to participate in this program. In order to determine which ELLs would most benefit from the program, we will the first benchmark results of the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, Fundations Unit Tests, Simple Solutions (grammar) tests, as well as results from the Fall 2018 NYSITELL and Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. The supplemental program also addresses the professional development needs of teachers, and seeks to increase the level of involvement of ELL parents. The afterschool program will be held from October 24, 2018 2018 to May 8, 2019. It will take place on Wednesdays from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. for two teachers and 1 1/2 hour for a supervisor to oversee the program. The language of instruction for the program is English. The instructional activities will take place in one classroom as directed by the ENL teacher. Additionally, the program will include a collaboration with Alley Pond Environmental Center for a Saturday component where students will interact with diverse live animals to complement the science unit on animals. This "Science Saturday Program" is slated to take place during four Saturdays April 6, 2019, April 13, 2019, May 4, 2019, and May 11, 2019. The program supervisor's hours would be from 11:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. As instructional materials, teachers will use a variety of materials, Discussion for Learning, ReadWorks, the Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT books, Mondo Publishing's Let's Sing About It! for ELLs, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System, Footsteps 2 Brilliance, and National Geographic leveled fiction and nonfiction books. The ENL teachers would focus on oral language development, improvement of listening skills, vocabulary development, and development of usage skills for writing. For the duration of the program, students' attendance will be kept rigorously. Teachers will clock in and clock out as proof of service, and such records will be kept in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All staff working with the ELLs need to be cognizant of the best practices which will help their students not only become proficient in the English language but also to become academically successful. Therefore, the professional development which they receive is designed to ensure that all teachers of ELLs have the necessary instructional tools to address their students' needs. All teachers of ELLs, including the two certified ENL teachers, receive training on an ongoing basis, on-site and off-site, during the school day, and after the school day. AIS teachers who work with ELLs and teachers who work in the afterschool program for ELLs receive training on a consistent basis as well. The training will be conducted by the Instructional Coach and by the principal. Teachers in the program will receive training in ELA, in English as a New Language, and in math, by staff members from the Queens South FSC, as well as from staff members from the DOE's Central Office. The professional development is scheduled for 80 minutes every Monday after dismissal. Every Tuesday after dismissal, teachers of ELLs, including ENL teachers, meet in teams to engage in other professional learning opportunities, i.e. analyzing student work, planning standards-based lessons, reviewing data, and conducting inquiry. There are also two other times during the week that all teachers, including ENL teachers, meet in teams during the school day (common prep periods). Additionally, teachers of ELLs, particularly the two ENL teachers may also attend monthly workshops given by the FSC, as well as the OELLs. All teachers of ELLs will also be invited to attend afterschool per session activities covering some of the topics discussed below. The Professional Learning Action Plan for the 2018-2019 anticipates that we will have cycles of learning on the following topics: Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP), The Reading Strategies Book, Vocabulary Instruction; Reading with Power and Passion: Supporting Independent Reading; Amplify Science; Math in Practice. Differentiated professional learning opportunities for ENL teachers will cover 1) Educating Students with Disabilities that are ELLS 2) Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching 3) Academic Language for ELLs and Struggling Readers. Professional Development will be given by the principal, M. Saint-Juste, the instructional coach, Bridget O'Dea, the BFSC staff, and OELLs staff, as well as other DOE staff and/or consultants. The instructional coach who also will be working in the program will herself be coached by the principal, as well as participate in professional learning activities to allow her to turnkey training to her colleagues. All professional development activities are documented. We expect that the professional learning opportunities will impact student learning in the following areas: speaking and listening skills, reading and writing skills. Student growth will be monitored and tracked through formative and summative assessments, conference notes, running records, and benchmark assessments. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 47  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Schedule and Duration: Our parent coordinator, Andrea Kelly, provides and/or schedules two to three parent workshops for parents each month. Workshops are held from September to June during the day and evening in order to accommodate the needs of all parents. They may last one-to-two hours. The workshops include Using the First in Math program, Making Thinking Visible, Helping Your Child with Phonics/Phonemic Awareness (Fundations), Preventing Child Abuse and Neglect, Family Fitness, Vocabulary and Language Development, Helping your Child Get Ready for the NYSESLAT, Understanding the Kindergarten Application Process, and Math Literacy for Early Childhood learners. We also engage consultants to conduct relevant workshops for parents. The following staff will provide workshops on academic subjects: Bridget O' Dea, the literacy/math coach, and teachers who are certified in ENL, in Common Branch, special education, and the visual arts. Andrea Kelly, the parent coordinator who is also the liaison for Child Abuse and Neglect, will deliver the workshop on that topic. Additionally, we are working with NYCThrive to provide workshops for parents on social-emotional development. Our Parent Coordinator works with the Translation and Interpretation unit to ensure that parents are informed appropriately. Parents of ELLs receive invitations in their home language. Workshop flyers are posted outside of the school as well as in the school's main lobby. Additionally, workshops are posted on the school's website, and included on the monthly calendar which is distributed to all parents. Workshops are held between 8:15 a.m. to 9:30 a.m; 1:00 p.m. to 2:15 p.m.; 2:20 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. and in the early evening hours. The Parent Coordinator ensures that parents of ELLs receive translation support at workshops. In our building, we have paraprofessionals who speak Spanish, Urdu and Punjabi, some of the main languages of our population. We also have parent volunteers who assist as translators. The Parent Coordinator also utilizes The Big Word for contracted interpretation services. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Public School 51Q Borough Queens School Number 051 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Magdaly Saint-Juste Coach Bridget O'Dea ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nesrin Balkaya Teacher/Subject Area Lori Gandelman, AIS Teacher Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Laurie Mullodzhanov Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Jan Dee McDougal Parent Gabriella Murillo Parent Coordinator Andrea Kelly Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 212 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.60% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We administer the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (BAS) to all students at the beginning of the year. We use the results to determine how to group students during the school day, and to determine which students may need additional services outside of the classroom setting. In comparing the past data of students' reading levels using Fountas and Pinnell BAS, traditionally, ELLs perform at the Pre A reading level on the first benchmark assessment in Kindergarten. This was the case for the F&P administration conducted between September and October 2016. During the 2016-2017 school year, while all Kindergarten ELLs started at the Pre-A level, by the end of the year, three students were able to meet or surpass the benchmark level D on the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment while four Grade One students met the benchmark J on the Fountas and Pinell Benchmark Assessment. We do notice though that ELLs-SWD do not make any significant progress during the first two years of school. They are the most likely group to remain at a level A at the end of Grade 1. ELLs are also 2018-19 CEP 51  assessed with Fundations Probes for phonics and phonemic awareness skills in both Kindergarten and Grade 1. We use that information to deliver instruction through adjusted time on task for work assigned, repetition of directions, modeling of skills, reteaching of concepts that are not clear to the students, and use of hands-on and visual materials. During the 2017-2018 school year, the school will pilot the Teacher's College Writing Project in all Grades K and 1 classrooms so this will be another measure used to gauge the progress our ELLs are making. We also requested the ELL Benchmark Assessments offered by the Periodic Assessment Office and will evaluate whether or not these assessments should be administered to our Grade 1 ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The professional learning team and the MOSL team meet to discuss assessments at the end of the closing year and at the beginning of the new school year. We develop a consensus map and curriculum maps which include the timeline of assessments for the whole school year. We also develop a professional learning plan at the beginning of the year, and revise that plan throughout the year in order to meet the needs of the teachers and the students. At the beginning of the year, our instructional coach, who is also the ENL liaison for our school, meets with the teachers to review policies and requirements, including the Testing Administration Memo workshop. She plans a norming workshop for teachers to ensure that the assessment process is rigorous. Once it is time to assess, teachers are given time and/or coverage to administer the Fountas and PInnell assessments as well as the DOE writing tasks and the DOE math tasks. The ENL team also meets to discuss who our ELLs are and what type of services will need to be planned for them. Moreover, the professional learning action plan sets aside time for analyzing data from assessments in order to impact instruction. The analysis leads to a review if instructional practices, of resources that are in place, or need to be put in place, and of targeted professional learning for teachers. One of the ENL teacher is a member of the seven-member Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP), which is a new initiative in our school that will allow teachers to analyze data and align it to instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs on a continuous basis. At the beginning of the year, all students, including ELLs are administered the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments as a baseline assessment. We also administer the DOE math and writing tasks as baseline assessments in the fall. The F&P is administered twice more throughout the year while the DOE tasks are administered again at the end of the year. Additionally, we administer the Go Math assessments three times a year. All interim assessment results in reading, writing, math, social studies, and science are disaggregated for that population of students. On a short term basis, the data indicates whether or not individual students need additional assistance, inform the type of materials and resources that are needed for ELL students, and the type of professional development needed for all teachers, not just ENL teachers. We want to see an increase in the number of ELLs who are meeting the CCLS standards or approaching the CCLS standards from one benchmark assessment to the next. In the same way, when we examine the NYSESLAT results, we want to see that if our students are not yet proficient, at least they are moving from one level to the next (from beginner to advanced for instance), and that their scale scores are showing significant growth from one year to the next. Our data analysis has a direct correlation to the type of instructional decisions made by teachers and by the administration. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the end of the school year, and at the beginning of the new school year, teachers meet vertically and horizontally to discuss summative assessments results and to decide next steps. The Reading Recovery or the AIS teacher is in charge of meeting with all Grade 1 teachers to discuss the students who are performing at the bottom third tier in reading. She assesses the bottom 20% of two classes and from that bottom 20%, she meets with the team and selects students who will need Tier 3 intervention. The other students are selected for Tier 2 interventions with the SETSS/IEP/AIS teacher and/or an afterschool program. That process is repeated throughout the year during teacher-team meetings, after each benchmark period, and based on RTI a protocols. The literacy interventions we currently use include Recipe for Reading, Fundations Double-Dose, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System, and Reading Recovery. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 CEP 52  Our Response to Intervention program has a specific structure. When students are exhibiting delays in the classroom, the school uses many data to figure out what should be the next steps taken. We review the language background, results of the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL, any previous records the students may have as well as assessments which the students have taken. Students in Kindergarten, including ELLs, are administered the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment in September; this assessment also includes an inventory of beginning literacy skills. By the first week of October, parents receive a progress report, translated into various languages, which indicate how their children are doing. By the end of that month, students who show signs of struggling beyond what is common, are identified for Academic Intervention Services. In Grade 1, students, including ELLs, are identified based on their performance on the last Fountas and Pinell benchmark in June of the previous school year. New data from the September/October Fountas and Pinnell is also considered, especially, for ELLs who are newcomers to the country or to the school. The basis of any RTI program is high quality Tier 1 instruction, and we believe that we provide that at PS 51Q. Our comprehensive literacy instruction is delivered in a workshop model which allows teachers to work in small groups in the classroom during guided reading or 1:1 for independent reading. Instructional resources include Fundations, ReadyGen, the ReadyGen Strategies Handbook, Imagine Learning, and Razz Kids for our students. Tier 2 instruction includes Fundations Double-Dose, and/or Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention. Additionally, Reading Recovery has been a Tier 3 intervention in our school for the past three years. In September of the new school year, all Grade 1 students, including ELLs, are ranked in terms of reading proficiency, and if they fall within the bottom third for the grade , they are identified to receive 1:1 Tier 3 reading services at our school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data we have been examining, our Kindergarten ELLs show significant progress from September to June. That is supported by the fact that we see growth in proficiency levels, even if the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT are different assessments. We see the same positive results in Grade 1. After examining the results of the May 2016 NYSESLAT, we noticed that this year, there were more Kindergarten students (5) reaching proficiency (Commanding Level) than previously. However, the number of Grade One students who reached proficiency level had decreased to four. Encouragingly though, the majority of the Grade One students (18 of 33) did reach the Expanding Level. Furthermore, of the five SWD-ELLs, two had reached the Expanding Level, one had reached the Transitioning Level, but the other two were at the Emerging Level. ELL-SWD students also do not have the same success rate of passing the NYSESLAT at the end of Grade 1. For the 2016 NYSESLAT, we had one Kindergarten student who reached the Commanding level, and four Grade 1 ELL-SWD who reached the Commanding level. As per the NYSESLAT results, the majority of the students at PS 51 make significant gains in language whether they have had service for one year (Kindergarten students) or two years (most Grade 1 students). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assessment results are shared at vertical and horizontal teacher-team meetings. Teacher-team meetings take place at least three times during the week. The NYSESLAT results are used to make programming/scheduling decisions, as well as instructional decisions. After benchmark periods are over, the Fountas and Pinnell assessment data results are compiled by grade level and by class. They are further disaggregated by sub groups. This process allows decisions to be made in the following areas: grouping students, workshops for parents, differentiated homework assignments, change in instructional practices, etc., before/after school intervention, etc. Since we also administer benchmark assessments in writing and math, those results are also analyzed in the same ways, leading to the same decision-making process. The school has a Google Drive account to which all teachers have access. Teacher teams and individual teachers share and access documents on that account. Additionally, the school keeps a data folder for benchmark assessments, and each classroom teacher keeps a data binder in their classroom. These structures make it easier to be able to access information that lead to critical instructional decision-making. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 53  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently, we have a freestanding ENL program at our school. We have two self-contained ENL classes in Grades K and 1. The teachers are certified both in ENL and in Common Branches. Students who are not in those self-contained classrooms, i.e. such as ELLs-SWD, travel together as a group into the self-contained classrooms. The ENL teachers and the collaborating teachers meet together to decide which periods those students will be travel to receive their ENL services. The teachers' program cards reflect the agreed-upon decisions . Students are grouped heterogeneously, that is with mixed proficiency levels, as much as possible. We analyze the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT results in order to determine how to best deliver instruction to our ELLs. We program our students to ensure that they receive the services to which they are entitled. For entering, beginning, emerging, and low intermediate students, instruction totals 360 minutes per week. For transitioning and ELLs, 0.5 unit of study (2 periods) are ENL/ELA and .5 (2 periods weekly) are standalone ENL or integrated ENL/content area. The students at the expanding/advanced level have 1 unit (4 periods weekly) of ENL/ELA or other Content Area. The total number of minutes for transitioning and expanding ELLs is 180 minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our ENL program, NYSESLAT and NYSETELL are scrutinized in order to ensure that our students receive the mandated instructional minutes. The program cards reflect this information, as does the STARS system used for keeping track of programming in NYC DOE schools. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. The goal is to develop the students' English language skills while using grade level materials that are CCLS-based. All ELLs at PS 51Q receive services from a teacher who in certified in both ESL and in Common Branch. The teachers meet at grade-level teacher team meetings and plan CCLS-based units of study that address the needs of the ELL population. SWD-ELLs have a language para who facilitates comprehension by using both the students' native language and English. There are certain components of our curriculum which allow for information to be delivered in the native language, notably, the Imagine Learning Program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 54  a.We do not have SIFE students. b.Our plan for newcomers is to immerse them in day-to-day activities in their classes using ENL methodologies. We have found the Imagine Learning program to be a good one for this group of students with its emphasis on basic vocabulary development. We also try to pair the newcomers with other students with the same language. c.In addition to the strategies described above, we help the developing students through the Let's Talk About It program for ELLs, which encourages discussion among students. The Fundations program also helps the students develop an understanding of the structure of the English Language, as does the Simple Solutions Usage and Grammar program which is used by the ENL teacher in Grade 1. d.We do not have Long Term ELLs. e.Former ELLs are supported via guided reading, independent reading conferences, and writing conferences. Former ELLs will now be given 2 periods a week of integrated ENL in ELA or in a Content Area. They will also have ELL testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs-SWD are serviced in small groups using visuals, manipulatives, and other ESL techniques with an emphasis on academic vocabulary development. ENL teachers will collaborate with classroom teachers to ensure that strategies are implemented in all settings. During the 2016-2017 school year, we used the intervention program Recipe for Reading with our ELL-SWDs, Fundations Double-Dose with our ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The purpose of all intervention is that our ELLs-SWD will reach their IEP goals with ENL mandates and methodologies. We use ReadyGen, Fundations, GoMath, Passport to Social Studies, and Foss Science with the ELLs-SWD and supplement these materials to address their group and individual needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school participated in the Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP) for the first time during the 2017-2018 school year. The Grade 1 ENL teacher was a member of the CARP. We considered the impact of sight word knowledge and of the implementation of rigorous reading strategies on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. We focused on 42 Grade 1 students (38 of 42 -90%- were ELLs or Special Needs students) who started the school year with F&P levels ranging from PA to C. By the end of the school year, all but three students had made significant gains in reading and 15 students had reached F&P level I or above. Moreover, three of the students also met the Grade 1 expectation of Fountas and Pinnell Level J. In Kindergarten, ELLs students received one-to-one intervention through the Great Leaps program, and small group intervention through the Leveled Literacy Intervention System. Those students who received the intervention also showed growth in reading skills. We also piloted an intervention program Footsteps 2 Brilliance with our ELL population. We liked that parents had access to the platform, and notice a positive correlation between parents who logged on to the platform and their children's results. For mathematics, we use GO Math ongoing assessments to monitor the students' progress and to form flexible math groups based on the needs of the students. We also use the online program First in Math. For Science and Social Studies, the ENL teachers use the materials and resources available to the general education population and provide differentiated instruction using ENL methodologies. As a rule, ELLs are not struggling in science and social studies but may have difficulty with certain concepts based on language needs, particularly in vocabulary development. Those are addressed on a 1:1 basis or in small groups in the classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are continuing to use ReadyGen, ReadyGen Sleuth, Scaffolding Strategies Handbook for ELA and GO Math, for mathematics instruction. During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers participated in the Teacher's College Writing 2018-19 CEP 55  Project. They also engaged in ongoing professional development for improving their pedagogy through Math Solutions. For all programs used, ENL strategies are applied. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs. They participate in all school-based activities, including instructional trips. ELLs are usually invited to particpate in an afterschool program during the school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, we also piloted a Science Saturday Program for ELLs in which Alley Pond Environmental Center worked with the students to supplement the ongoing Grade 1 Animals unit. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the following instructional materials to support the instruction of ELLs: classroom materials, i.e. leveled and other reading books in English, manipulatives, supplemental materials—i.e. ENL software (Imagine Learning English and Raz Kids, Pebble Go for science in Grade 1, Footsteps 2 Brilliance, and First in Math), wall charts, word walls, pictures and other visuals, grammar student books and workbooks in Grade 1, Ready Gen, Go Math, Amplify Science, and Passport to Social Studies. studies. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Some of our materials, including the ENL software Imagine Learning English, have native language support. Additionally, paraprofessionals in the building may provide additional language support to ELLs, and ELLs may have access to native language books in the library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources are provided according to students' grade and age levels. All programs used in the school have been determined to be appropriate for ELLs' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use the following instructional materials to support the instruction of ELLs: classroom materials, i.e. leveled and other reading books in English, manipulatives, supplemental materials—i.e. ENL software (Imagine Learning English and Raz Kids, Pebble Go for science in Grade 1), wall charts, word walls, pictures and other visuals, grammar student books and workbooks in Grade 1, Ready Gen, Go Math, Foss Science, Houghton Mifflin Social Studies, and Core Knowledge social studies. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a Kindergarten Orientation to which all families are invited. To ensure that parents of ELLs get the most out of that meeting, we provide translators for the duration of the meeting. Afterwards, staff members conduct a walkthrough where ELL parents can observe Kindergarten classes in action, with an emphasis on the ENL classrooms. During the month of June 2016, we were able to administer the NYSITELL to all our currently enrolled prek students who registered for our Kindergarten program. We also contacted parents of incoming Kindergartners and the majority of them were able to bring their children to our school to be assessed. We were happy with that outcome as it will make it easier to plan classes for September, which will also make the transition to our school easier for parents and their children. Throughout the year, when new ELLs enroll in our school, in addition to the parent interviews, and any other mandated assessments, we also do a quick screening again to gauge the general level of readiness. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 2018-19 CEP 56  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The school puts together a Professional Learning Action Plan which lays out the priorities for the year. This action plan is revised throughout the year, as needs either recede or emerge. Teachers participate in workshops in a variety of settings: after school, in teacher-teams during the day, as well as off-site. These workshops will be conducted by the Instructional Coach, the principal, and by teachers. Teachers of ELLs will continue to expand on their understanding of the Danielson Framework, of vocabulary development and enrichment for ELLs, as well as on strategies to develop strong ELLs learners in literacy and mathematics. They will also take advantage of relevant resources that can be found on the DELLSS DOE website, including videos such as Mathematics Problem-Solving Strategies for ELLs and What Can we Do to Support English Language Learners? During the 2017-2018 school year, all teachers at PS 51Q will be participating in the Collaborative Action Research Project. The primary team will include seven members, including the Grade 1 ENL teacher and will turnkey the training to their colleagues. Additionally, teachers will also be focusing on improving writing instruction through their participation in the Teacher's College Writing Project. All teachers, including ENL teachers, meet every Monday afternoon during the school year for 80 minutes of professional development. Professional development opportunities are documented with agendas, minutes and attendance sheets. Teachers are also required to log in all professional development activities. The Action Plan for Professional Learning includes cycles of learning on the following: Vocabulary Instruction; Reading with Power and Passion: Supporting Independent Reading; Amplify Science; Math in Practice. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During the professional learning periods, professional development will be provided for all teachers to address the needs of ELLs. Teachers are given coverage in order to attend off-site professional development (in addition to Mondays and Tuesdays). The focus will be on learning about ELL language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For the 50% professional development requirement for ENL teachers, the topics may include language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Attendance and agendas for each meeting are kept on file. Teachers are also required to keep their own log of professional development opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 57  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to four meetings scheduled by the DOE during the school year (two parent-teacher conferences, and two other parent meetings held in the evening), teachers also set aside 35 minutes for parent meetings every Tuesday of the school year after the 2:20 p.m. dismissal. Parents are notified with an interpreter if necessary, or in writing, in the preferred language. Over-the-phone translation services are used when an in-person interpreter is not available. Teachers of English language learners meet with parents at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting usually takes place on Tuesday afternoon. Often teachers use the teacher-made Progress Report which is sent to parents three times a year as a tool to engage parents in conversations. The meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands, often a member of the PS 51Q staff. Teachers keep a log of their contacts with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At PS 51, the Parent Coordinator provides ongoing workshops. Some of those workshops include Increasing your Child's Vocabulary, and Preventing Summer Slide. We have made a concerted effort to include parents in our school, such as reaching out to them as Parent Volunteers or as School Leadership Team members. In general, parents volunteer to help classroom teachers, to accompany classes on field trips, to help run the Scholastic Book Fair and Picture Day fundraiser. Parents also sign up to help specifically during lunch time in the cafeteria. If translators are needed for any of these activities, the Parent Coordinator may seek out translators from the Big Word, the Translation and Interpretation Unit, parents who have agreed to serve as translators through our volunteer program, and/or school staff who are fluent in languages other than English. During the 2017-2018 school year, ThriveNYC collaborated with our school community. We plan to continue our collaboration with them. In the fall, they will have a workshop on mental health services which could be of benefit if not to themselves and their children at least to someone else they may know. The parent coordinator has also referred parents to many outside agencies, including the Arab American Family Support Center (Domestic Violence), Queens Public Library (ENL classes), Sanctuary for Families (Domestic Violence), The River Fund (food, HRA benefits, clothing, shoes, etc.), Catholic Charities of Brooklyn and Queens (rent assistance). The Parent Coordinator may seek out translators from the Big Word, the Translation and Interpretation Unit, parents who have agreed to serve as translators through our volunteer program, and/or school staff who are fluent in languages other than English. The needs of the parents are evaluated based on conversations between parents and parent coordinator, parents and classroom teachers, including ENL teachers, and parents and the principal. The Parent Coordinator surveys the parents to find out if they would be interested in English Language classes at DOE-approved sites or at the Queens Library, and provides the information to the parents. She will offer that class in the fall. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Magdaly Saint-Juste, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 51Q School DBN: 27Q051 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Magdaly Saint-Juste Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Andrea Kelly Parent Coordinator Nesrin Balkaya ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Solano Parent N/A N/A Bridget O'Dea N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jan Dee McDougal School Counselor Mary Barton N/A Laurie Mullodzhanov Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Related Service Provider Lori Gandelman Other AIS Teacher N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q051 School Name: P.S. 51Q Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Andrea Kelly Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents complete the HLIS with a trained pedagogue. In-school interpretation by staff who other languages in addition to English, and over-the-phone interpretation services are available through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents can receive language assistance and have their questions answered in their preferred languages. The completion of the HLIS, Part 3- Parent Information provides the school with critical information about the parents preferred language for communicating orally with the staff and their preferred language for receiving written communication from the school staff. The Home Language Code is recorded in the BIOU screen of ATS. The preferred language choices are recorded in the RCPL ATS screen. Parents receive the Student Emergency Contact cards in their preferred language. We used the interpretation services to translate surveys conducted by the school. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Slovak Macedonian Russian Urdu Ukrainian Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Punjabi (Punjab) Arabic Spanish 0 1 2 2 2 3 21 25 65 0 0.23 0.45 0.45 0.45 0.68 4.76 5.67 14.74 1 1 3 2 2 4 23 23 64 .023 0.23 0.68 0.45 0.45 0.91 5.22 5.22 14.51 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Excluding the languages listed above, we do not have preferred languages that represent at least 10% of our population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Incoming Student Class Assignment Letter August 2018 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Request to DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I) 2017-18 School Year Calendar September 2018 Print from DOE website Parent Teacher Conference Notification 9/18; 11/18; 3/19; 5/19 Provided by DOE T&I Unit ENL Parent Survey/Program Selection Within 10 days of admission Parents' Bill of Rights 9/14/2018 Parents' Guide to Language Access 9/8/2018 Achieve NYC Title I Meeting DOE website DOE website DOE website DOE When received September or October 2018 DOE Online Document 2018-19 CEP 63  Kindergarten Orientation Invitations May 2019 NYC Schools Account Activation October 2018 DOE T&I Unit/Big Word DOE Website Parent Letter for Math and Literacy Fridays School Progress Reports and Report Cards One Week Before Event DOE T&I Unit/Big Word 10/18; 11/18; 4/19; 6/19 DOE T&I Unit, STARS Programming Promotion in Doubt Letters January/February 2019 Recess, Chancellor's Conference Days, Non-Attendance Days As per the Calendar DOE Website DOE Website IEPs Newsletters As per special education regulations DOE Website 9/18; 1/19; 5/19 Request to DOE T&I Unit four weeks in advance/Big Word Cell Phone Policy 9/22/17 DOE T&I Unit School Calendar First of the Month Request to DOE T&I Unit four weeks in advance/Big Word 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent -Teacher Conferences 9/8/17; 11/1/17; 3/1/18; 5/9/18 Parent Involvement Tuesdays Throughout the school year Kindergarten Orientation April/May 2019 IEP Meetings As per regulations ENL Parent Surveys and Program Selection Within ten days of admission interpretation service(s)? Use the Big Word services, bilingual staff and/or Over-the-Phone (OTP) interpreters Use bilingual staff and/or OTP interpreters Use the Big Word services, and bilingual staff Use the Big Word services, bilingual staff and/or OTP interpreters Use the Big Word services, bilingual staff , relatives, and/or OTP interpreters; also show parent video in the home language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will first try to contact the families using their preferred languages. Staff who are proficient in those languages will make the phone calls. If not, we will use the OTP interpreters. We will also use email, and if we do not have staff who are proficient in the parents' preferred written language, we will use Google Translate. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff will be made aware of the goals of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 at the first faculty meeting in September 2018, including the obligation to provide interpretations for parents who need it. The Language Access Coordinator will be identified to the staff. The staff will receive handouts on how to request translation of documents and on using the over-the-phone interpretation services. They will view a video on the OTP services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When parents enter the school, they find posted signage that lets them know that they can receive interpretation services. At the front desk, they are shown a card that they can use to point to the language in which they would like to communicate orally with the staff. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use surveys in multiple languages to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive. 2018-19 CEP 65 
