2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q053 School Name: M.S. 053 BRIAN PICCOLO Principal: ANDREA MAJIED 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brian Piccolo Middle School 53 342700010053 School Number (DBN): 27Q053 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 1045NameokeStreet, FarRockaway, NY 11691 Phone Number: (718)471-6900 Fax: (718)471-6955 Andrea Majied Yard School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: amajied@schools.nyc.gov New York Edge Andrea MajiedYard AulandarYoung Lucia Moffa DanyaalMcClendon Daniel Alicea Deborah Mahoney District Information Geographical District: 27 Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Ozone Park, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 642-5770 Phone Number: (718) 348-2994 Fax: QSFSC FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Marlene Wilks 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Ozone Park, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)642-5839 Phone Number: (718) 642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Andrea MajiedYard Lucia Moffa DanyaalMcClendon Odetta Seecharran Deborah Mahoney AulandarYoung N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x X Daniel Alicea KamelliaHill Lynda McCue Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Staff /Parent/Other Contributor Staff /Parent/Other Contributor Staff /Parent/Other Contributor Staff/ Parent /Other Contributor Staff/ Parent/Other Contributor Staff/ Parent /Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. MS 53, "The Swagger School," is a middle school serving children in grades six through eight located in Far Rockaway Queens. The mission of MS 53 is, In partnership with families, to foster a community of excellence by promoting achievement in academic and character education in a safe and supportive learning environment. Based on a foundation of inquiry and accountability, our scholars will develop the skills necessary to excel in an ever changing 21st Century global society. We believe that our mission is best accomplished through a structure of communities that are committed to children and that are characterized by strong instructional team leadership, increased opportunities to learn, time on task, a climate of high expectations for all students, a safe and orderly school environment, frequent monitoring of students’ progress with appropriate instructional adjustments to students’ programs, high levels of commitment to student success, an emphasis on teaching for learning through the use of technology, responsive supporting services, and extensive and authentic family/school/community partnerships At MS 53 our core belief guides our work; all students, General education, those for whom English is a New Language, and those with Individual Education Plans, have the potential to achieve academic success and thus be prepared for the rigors of college and professional life. We believe that by separating our classes by gender, modeling Social and Emotional skills, implementing additional Interactive Co-Teaching classes to provide students with increased opportunities to move from the most to least restrictive environment, and by using Ramapo For Children, our students will be more confident and willing to take academic risks which will ultimately provide vibrant opportunities to grow and express a multitude of interests and talents. At MS 53 we are committed to preparing all students to be college and career ready. We devote a great deal of human resources to ensuring that all students and their families receive the needed supports and accommodations to achieve at high levels. Students must have multiple opportunities to engage in rich cognitively appropriate activities that develop and challenge their natural curiosity preparing them for college and career readiness Our Ramapo For Learning training will support our teachers in teaching students the critical character traits that are acceptable in a community of productive citizens. In addition, We have made continuous progress in the following areas of the Framework for Great Schools: Positive responses in "Collaborative Teachers". We organized our school schedule so that all grade teams teaching among teachers using a scheduling program that allows teachers 2 common periods weekly promoting collaborative planning . Our schools’ professional development plan, designed to meet individual teachers’ needs Support plans for teachers was driven by professional development needs assessment survey. This has led to growth among teacher pedagogy 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  and the infusion of rigorous instruction in teacher created lesson plans. In addition, we plan to provide targeted support for first year teachers through the Office of Teacher Effectiveness There will be 1 hour dedicated towards strengthening the academic needs in ELA and 1 hour geared towards mathematics. The 5th hour will be used towards Enrichment activities such as, 1-1 Small Groups, Homework Help, Drama/Performing Arts, STEM, or Public Speaking. In addition, we are providing Response to Intervention (RTI) during the Renewal hour. After looking closely at the State Tests results and additional data from teachers (Item Skill Analysis, Scantron), unit assessments, observations, Performance Tasks), students will be placed in strategic groups during the Extended Learning Time. Students will be grouped based on the following: Levels of Performance based on the Developmental Reading Assessment, GoMath Unit assessments, and Item Analysis (State tests). Our efforts in providing a safe school tone, attendance improvement, and infusing better habits of learning for all students have resulted in progressive improvements over the past three years. Our entire school staff has knowledge of individual students and their needs and progress. We have partnered with many organizations to support our work. Some of our primary Community Based Organization's (CBO )are the following:  New York Edge- As a Community School, New York Edge is our CBO partner. We have on site staff, including a Community School Director who works firsthand to support improvement initiatives including attendance, mental health, academic enrichment, and the social emotional well being of our students and families. This year, we will also be using Ramapo for Children through New York Edge, which will build our capacity to promote restorative practices.  Urban Arts- Through our Urban Arts partnership (21st Century Community Learning Center), we are able to provide a variety of Performing Arts programs to our students on a weekly basis. UA has provided us with Drumming, Dance, Photography, and Visual Arts. Students are able to select their performing arts group, and their learning culminates in two major performances during the year.  NorthWell LIJ Health- Our on site clinic allows us to provide immediate care to students, with a North Well medical doctor on site.  Community Mediation Services (SONYC) - SONYC provides additional after-school programming to students  including academic, STEM and arts enrichment. Smartworks- Another CBO that provides our students with video production,music production, and dance during our Performance Arts blocks. We provide our students with a rich comprehensive approach that engages our scholars in visual and performing arts experiences. Through continued limited support in funding, we will further develop the best practices of The Smart-Works consultant. Students’ artwork will proudly be displayed resulting in a school environment that is bright and decorative as well as student centered. Each organization brings something unique and special to support our students. Our major concern with most CBO’s is based on our location. It has been and still is a challenge to consistently bring a variety of quality resources to Far Rockaway. We have offered several expanded learning opportunities to our students this past year and we look forward to providing a greater variety of supports this school year. In addition to the above programs, we also offer or have partnered with: Fyrezone (Movie Production)- Offered as a performing arts choice, students are able to learn the art of acting, chorus, and video production. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  Basketball- As an after school program through NY Edge. Soccer- As an after school program through NY Edge. New York Cares- Through year long partnerships with New York Cares (when available), we are able to continue the beautification of our school, including mural paintings and storage organization. Some additional academic programs that we have offered are as follows: ● Winter Recess ELA/Math Support ● Spring Recess ELA/Math Support ● Success Mentoring- For attendance and social emotional support. Our current register / student population is 235, serving grades 6-8. We are a Universal Title 1 school. Our student demographics are as follows: Gender: Female – 40% Male – 60% We offer single gender classes when possible in an effort to meet the unique learning needs of our students. Ethnicity: Hispanic – 41.7%: Amer. Indian or Alaskan Native – 2.13% : Asian – 1.28% : Black – 52.34% : White – 1.73% English Language Learners (ELL) - 14.47% Language proficiency levels include entering, emerging, expanding, transitioning, and commanding. The vast majority of our ELL population are from Spanish speaking countries. We offer push-in and pull out services, with our ENL teacher supporting content area teachers to meet the needs of ELL's within their classrooms. We also offer after-school enrichment services for ELL's. NYSESLAT data is used to ensure that classroom teachers provide supports to ELL students to access the general education curriculum. Special Education (SWD) - 35.32%, General Ed – 64.58%, Least Restrictive Environment - 14.45%, Integrated Co-Teaching - 37.35%, Most Restrictive Environment – 48.19% We currently have 4 self contained classes, and 4 ICT classes. The majority of students with IEP's are classified as Learning Disabled or Emotionally Disturbed. As a Renewal School, we will expand our implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year:  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during summer programming provided by SITC.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near our school  Continue to ensure access to support the needs of our increasing Spanish speaking student population Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and  instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and to support staff to effectively respond to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14   Additional strategies to increase parent and family engagement. We will also undergo a comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Framework for Great Schools (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust) to inform the development of our School. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q053 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 267 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 80 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 14 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 79.8% % Reduced Lunch 20.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 43.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 5% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 15.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, LEP, ED No N/A 57 57 90.0% 0.4% 32.6% 52.1% 1.1% 2.2% 4 50% 6.4 7.7% 14% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our most recent data from our School Quality Report indicates the following: SED Designation- FOCUS Latest QR Score- (1.1-P, 1.2-P, 2.2-P, 3.4-P, 4.1-P) Latest QR Date: May 24, 2018- May 25, 2018 2018 Average ELA Proficiency- 16% 2018 Average MATH Proficiency- 8% Other Data: Renewal-EMS Benchmark Update 2017-18 Student Attendance- 91.2% Framework/ Collaborative Teachers- 3.76 Framework/ Rigorous Instruction- 3.72 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  According to the Fall 2018 i-Ready Diagnostic Data, 88% students or more are performing below grade level in reading and 95% of students or more are performing below grade level in Mathematics. According to our 2017-18 Quality Review, Indicator 1.1 (Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards) was an additional finding rated, "Proficient." Strengths: An area of strength is that we work and support quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of our students. In all subjects we support the development of CCLS materials and guidance. A curricular development plan is articulated that includes the provision of professional development (PD), planning time in the school day, structures for vertical and horizontal alignment, as well as the purchase of commercial programs. Our professional development plan contains assorted curricular planning documents, scheduled teacher meeting time during the school day, after-school, weekends and summer sessions for teachers to prepare for incorporating the CCLS and pedagogical shifts into daily classroom instruction. Teachers use individual student data when they create lesson plans to ensure that grouping assignments are aligned to student needs and they revise the curriculum based on student needs. We maintain CBO partnerships who provide our students with weekly opportunities to engage in art enrichment activities that support our instructional methods. We continue to prioritize, support and encourage our staff to use contemporary instructional technology to engage all learners. The majority of our teachers create and use pre- and post-unit assessments as well as develop common performance tasks that are used to guide their instructional planning and collaborative assessment efforts. As our teachers are developing in their efforts to include student conferencing as the basis for instructional planning, most students have portfolios that indicate some written next steps they should take to make progress. Need: According to the recommendations for this tenet, areas of need include formalizing and expanding the curricular development plans to make available thorough maps for all subjects and classes with articulation for the needs of all learners. Data from pre- and post-assessments as well as i-Ready diagnostic data is collected, however, how teachers analyze, monitor, or use this data to modify or adjust plans to address students’ needs and varying skill levels is inconsistent. Lesson plans need to demonstrate consistent evidence of scaffolding for students with disabilities, advanced or English language learners (ELLs), increased differentiation of method or content in instructional activities and an increased number of examples of teachers incorporating higher-order questioning during instruction. Teachers need to use protocols for conducting and carrying out curricula modifications in plans or enacted lessons additionally, formal protocols and mechanisms need to be used to ensure that curricular and instructional planning materials have explicit scaffolds and strategies reflective of the student data represented by the class, for all subjects and learners. There needs to be a formal plan to create, execute, and formally reflect on interdisciplinary curriculum that encourages teachers to partner as they develop interdisciplinary lessons that include the arts, prepares students for the demands of the CCLS, integrates technology, and provides enrichment opportunities for all students. We will implement formative and summative assessments that will be systematically used across the school and subjects to identify progress toward achieving student outcomes. Additionally, we will ensure teachers use formal monitoring protocols in order to inform strategic curricular decisions and adjustments to ensure alignment between curriculum and assessment. Our administrative team and lead teachers will also hold data check-in meetings to assure that teachers are using multiple sources of data to inform instruction. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 is as follows: (1) Strengthen assessment literacy in order to know our students well, (2) Incorporate literacy strategies in all content areas to improve reading and writing skills, and (3) Use making thinking visible routines to increase engagement and rigor. Strengthen assessment literacy  Utilizing Understanding by Design (UBD) or backward planning and Differentiated Instruction (DI) teachers plan lessons with the end in mind. They map the curriculum by starting off with the summative assessment question. Professional learning around Danielson component 1E- Designing Coherent Instruction will be provided to teachers to support them in knowing and planning for their students (making data informed instructional decisions).  Our administrative team and lead teachers will also hold data check-in meetings to assure that teachers are using multiple sources of data to inform instruction.  Professional Learning and Peer inter-visitation cycles focus on providing feedback to peers on Danielson component 3D-Using Assessment in Instruction. Formal and informal observations emphasize improvement in the area of using assessment in instruction.   During instructional time, students have opportunities to engage in self and peer assessment. Incorporating literacy strategies in all content areas  Administrators and teacher leaders provide feedback to teachers in all content areas on incorporating more literacy in content areas.  1st year as a MSQI school: Teachers will utilize data from DRP assessments (Degrees of Reading Power) as well as READY ELA assessment data to target specific areas of need in reading and writing  Teachers also use questions from Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) wheel for planning lessons  Through Social Studies/ Humanities scholars will be exposed to a rich content, in addition, teachers will incorporate literacy skills in social studies classes to support students reading, writing, as well as rich discussions based on evidence from text and be able to have discussion in evidence from text. Use making thinking visible routines to increase engagement and rigor.  During common planning meetings, higher-order thinking questions are developed using DOK question stem starters using elements from Danielson 3B Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and rigorous and engaging tasks using elements from Danielson 3C Engaging Students in Learning. These tasks and questions will prompt students to make their thinking visible explain their thinking to others  All classrooms will have a coherent set of accountable talk prompts to encourage students to articulate what they are thinking and explain their reasoning in all content areas What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Teachers will provide instruction using CCLS-aligned curriculum in all content areas while infusing the instructional shifts to our diverse learners to assure all students are college and career ready. In ELA, we are implementing Teachers College Writing and Independent Reading with Small Group Instruction and Strategy Lessons using the Workshop Model as the core curriculum for English Language Arts. We are supplementing with My Perspectives. In Mathematics, teachers at in grades 6 & 7 are using the program Go Math, while incorporating reading and writing standards within instruction and tasks. In order to promote access and equity for all learners, all of our grade 8 students are enrolled in an Algebra I course which will culminate in them taking the regents exam. In grades 6 & 7 Science, teachers are implementing the Project Based Inquiry Science (PBIS) curriculum and in grade 8, we 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  continue to use the Glencoe science curriculum. Teachers also use SMART Science to integrate technology, and Discovery Education to provide students with opportunities to build knowledge about the world through a variety of texts. Teachers are using the new framework for Social Studies with Passports to Social Studies and Discovery Education as a supplement to providing students with infusions of content area literacy and vocabulary that supports learners at varied reading and interest levels. In order to best support our school's diverse learners, our school has implemented various technological assistant tools such as: interactive Smart Boards, ELMOS and computers for research and access to multi-media. In addition, we offer Strategic Math periods to grade 6 and 7 students based on i-Ready performance data, so that teachers can provide targeted instruction to meet the needs of all diverse learners. We offer supplemental reading programs that encourages reading through a diverse digital library. i-Ready is used by students in all grades to target reading/Math gaps and build comprehension and fluency . Our school implements curricula that meets academic needs through enrichment activities such as Dance, Video Production, Music Production. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? As a community school, and in partnership with many of our community based organizations, we provide a variety of diverse programs to meet the academic and social emotional needs of our MS 53 school population including single gender classes, performing arts, Ramapo Learning, and after school tutoring/sports programs. Our 7th grade classes also receive weekly instruction from a College Access for All advisor, as well as several college trips throughout the year through our partnership with "I Will Graduate". In all classrooms, we've deliberately populated our leveled libraries with informational and literary texts that help engage our students in conversations. We emphasize that our students use evidence to back up their thoughts, opinions and arguments so that they are prepared to make informed decisions that will impact their adult lives. In addition, we recognize that problem solving is not merely found in math; it is found in everyday life. We teach our students in a way where they develop a deep understanding of problems and concepts; where they realize that there are actually strategies to solving a problem rather than a fast answer. Understanding that children learn best when they build on what they already know; we promote coherence so that they are able to connect their learning across the grades onto their collegial path. All of our programs are geared to fostering a whole child approa2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  ch for all students to become college and career ready learners with an emphasis on the core subject areas in Math, ELA, Science and the Arts. Our teachers are trained to use technology 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  to minimize the learning growth and disparity of use that exists in urban schools settings. Our expanded learning time is scheduled for the last hour of our school day. During the extended learning time, students will engage in additional rigorous activities targeting literacy and mathematics. Students will engage in rigorous lessons with a focus on literacy, mathematics, science and social studies in a small group setting. Our staff works collaboratively during common planning to ensure that lessons are aligned in accordance with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will use their pedagogical skills to provide students with multiple entry points during both small group and whole class instruction. Teachers work to make sure that one or more of the literacy instructional shifts are evident in lesson and unit planning at the individual and team levels. In Mathematics, since Shift 1 (Focus) is embedded in the scope and sequence of the Go Math program, we are emphasizing the implementation of Shift 3 (Fluency), Shift 4 (Deep Understanding) and Shift 5 (Application) into all instructional plans and assessments. This is supported through professional development, common planning, and observations. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Delivery of instruction should closely alig2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  n itself to the Danielson Framework for teaching and should foster an outcome that is aligned to all of our data sources. Using several data sources (i-Ready, READY paper and pen2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  cil, DRP, classroom assessment data) teachers will identify trends, determine student- centered problems, form tiered groups and adjust lessons to meet the individual needs of thei2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  r students as indicated by strategic data sources represented in the school. We envision the delivery of instruction to include student centered classrooms with the teacher as facilitator, multiple opportunities for accountable talk, ongoing assessment of learning using multiple methods and students taking ownership of their learning. Teachers implement an interactive teaching model in all content areas with a combination of small and whole group instruction with student-student interaction as the focal point of the lesson. Classrooms are student-centered where teachers provide multiple opportunities for scholars to engage in accountable talk and think critically about a variety of topics. The Arts are integrated into classrooms to support creativity and as a pathway to learning. In ICT classrooms, teachers are co-teaching utilizing a variety of teaching models most frequently including Parallel Teaching, Station Teaching, and Team Teaching. Assessment is an integral part of instruction and teachers frequently monitors student learning through questions and assessment. Feedback to students is accurate and specific and advances learning. Teachers modify the curriculum based on assessments of student learning. Teachers use scaffolding techniques and strategies for differentiation to move students towards stronger understanding of concepts, while strengthening their academic vocabulary. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Multiple entry points will be used to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  address academic areas of improvement in all of our students in particular our SWDs and ELL sub population. By addressing the areas of deficiency through a tiered approach for learnin2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  g and tracking of data will allow for measurable growth to be more evident in a timely manner Teachers plan and deliver CCLS aligned lessons. Students and teachers report that the learning environment is safe. Now we must ensure that all teachers uniformly provide tailored instruction that meet the needs of all students. In addition, a robust and formal analysis of formative and summative student performance data by teachers through the Data Wise Improvement Process will strengthen the provision of multiple entry points with differentiation to meet the needs of diverse learners. Our aim is to work with teachers and expand and formalize efforts to identify and respond to the diverse needs of all students with instructional practices that acknowledge multiple entry points, invite values sharing, and support success for all. Further, we will work together to expand and formalize protocols and procedures within and across all subject areas and grade levels for using formative and summative assessments to monitor and adjust daily instruction and ensure all teachers provide regular feedback to students so that they can improve their work and take more ownership of their own learning. Teachers provide multiple entry points, supports, scaffolds, and extensions into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills through their work products. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? We have created an assessment calendar that will be used to monitor student progress and provide teachers with timely data that will be used to plan and inform instructional decisions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  The purpose of both our formative and summative assessment plan is twofold. First and foremost it is to inform our instruction for the purpose of pursuing of academic excellence. The second 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  reason is the growth and development of our teaching strategies to develop a more centrally aligned instructional vision All ELA teachers utilize i-Ready Diagnostic data to identify students' lexile levels. Students are assessed in September, January, and June. Teachers use knowledge of characteristics of reading levels to propel student comprehension, fluency, and decoding forward to create proficient readers. Students take On-Demand, Mid-Unit, and End-of-Unit Assessment in all writing types (Narrative, Argumentative, and Informational). Teachers use this data to modify and differentiate lessons to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers also use the Ready paper and pencil exam (a CCLS-aligned practice exam that mirrors the NYS Exam) as a benchmark assessment in October, January, and June in both ELA and Math. Students engage in differentiated work in both ELA and Math based on the results of their Ready assessment. Teachers meet weekly in Teacher Team/ Common Planning meetings using Data Wise protocols and agendas to review student work and achievement data and make informed instructional decisions based on student strengths and struggles. Teachers make revisions to curriculum maps and pacing calendars in Office 365 on a weekly basis to address gaps and to assure that curriculum is meeting the needs of each individual students. Teachers design small group instruction and one to one conferences for students based on the data. Teachers, coaches, and administration collect data on a daily basis in order to match the needs of students to appropriate teaching strategies to maximize quality and quantity of student achievement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Analysis of state exam scores is the major factor for explaining our data-informed classrooms. Careful reviews of scores and outcomes from the ELA and Math item analysis inform unit and lesson plans to address deficit areas. Subsequently, instructional groupings within classrooms are developed from the data. The item analysis yields results of CCLS deficits and mastery which is the springboard for classroom instruction. A root cause analysis was conducted with the data to understand the underlying cause/s of deficit areas. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) TCRWP Reading Assessments Diagnostic, Benchmark, Summative TCRWP Writing Assessments Diagnostic, Benchmark, Summative MSQI DRP2 Diagnostic Benchmark 6-8 6-8 6-8 ELL Periodic Assessments Diagnostic 6-8 NY Ready ELA Diagnostic, Benchmark 6-8 NY Ready Math Diagnostic, Benchmark 6-8 Track each student's ability to read difficult texts with fluency, accuracy, and comprehension. Track student's ability to write using grade level appropriate strategies and techniques, as measured by TCRWP rubrics and checklists. It allows us to place students in buckets by general reading level and to identify patterns in classes and across our school which in turn helps to make informed decisions about areas of need to target To provide teachers with detailed information about their students' strengths and needs in English language development and to support planning of individual and group instruction. To diagnose, assess and inform readiness for NY State Exams. Review student performance against standards over time for the students body of work. To diagnose, assess and inform readiness for NY State Exams. Review student performance against standards over time for the students body of work. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, students that scored 1 level below and on level on I-Ready in Algebraic Thinking will demonstrate performance gains of an average of 10% in mathematics from their pre-assessment (I-Ready assessment) in CCLS Domain: Expressions and Equations. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31 Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index on State Math Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Use of grade wide curriculum mapping and the use of Datawise protocol to assess, monitor and track assessment data Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) An assessment calendar has been created and all teachers have been trained in understanding baseline data, and the creation of targets and goals. Teachers use pre and post formative and summative assessments across grades and content areas assuring alignment between the curriculum and assessment tools.  Instructional staff members identify CCLS, instructional shifts and align lessons and resources accordingly.  Teachers identify gaps in curriculum resources and utilize supplemental material to close the gaps. Instructional staff members collaborate during 44- minute planning sessions to develop common core aligned lessons, tasks, and rubrics using common core aligned resources as mentioned above.  All Students Performance Index on State Math Exam Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Office of Renewal School Coach & Teaching Staff  Recommendations within teacher team 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  meetings inform lesson and assessment refinement as well as curriculum adjustment to support lower performing students as well as enrichment and extensions for higher performing students. All students will conduct Student-Led Conferences where they will be responsible for articulating their strengths and areas for improvement to their parents and guardians. Instructional resources such as graphic organizers, charts, graphs, activities with visual aides, scaffolds, and supports for our ELLs and SWDs which are specific and research-based. Teachers will take a multi-modality approach, provide multiple entry points to tasks and content through questioning and task design. At least 50 8th grade student taking the Algebra Regents in June will engage in a 3-hour Saturday Regents' Prep course. All Students Performance Index on State Math Exam ELL's & SWD Performance Index on State Math Exam Sept 2018-June 2019 (Once per marking period) Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff Increase in student led conference attendance Admin Team & Teaching Staff peer and administrator observations, agendas, minutes 8th grade students Performance on Algebra Regents. March 2, 2019-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff Attendance and topic/lesson analysis. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School staff will provide professional learning during parent/family engagement time around understanding rigorous instruction and ways to support their child toward success in mathematics and ELA at home. This parent/family engagement time occurs on a weekly basis from September to June. With the support of our Lead CBO, New York Edge, Imagine Math Facts training and support sessions for families will be offered at least 3 times per year. Our parent coordinator will also offer family engagement workshops, (at-least 2 in the spring) that address how to best support students in preparation for the NYS Math and ELA exams. We have also offered i-Ready parent workshops so that parents know how to best support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. We then prioritize allocation of funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we manage funds to support professional learning for strong social emotional programming so that we maintain a supportive environment for all. OTPS is scheduled to include the following: Teacher and Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, at least 25% of our scholars will demonstrate performance gains of at least 25% from their October 2018 baseline to mid year assessments in CCLS Domain: Expressions and Equations, as measured by the February 2019 Ready Math assessment. Student portfolios will be monitored and checked for student self-assessed tasks aligned to CCLS in November 2018, February 2019, and May 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NY READY (paper and pencil) & iReady Math assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? According to the School Quality Guide, our strengthens include the following: 81% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school 88% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria 93% of students say that they feel safe in their classes. Our school's needs relative to supportive environment of the framework for Great Schools, consist of the following: 35% of our students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. 52% of students say that rarely or never harass, bully, intimidate each other because of gender, gender identity, gender expression or sexual orientation at their school. We've implemented some activities and interventions to support the social and emotional developmental health of some students. While the school has created an innovative student incentive program, we are continuously seeking 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  ways to strategically organize the work to ensure collaboration amongst all stakeholders in support of successful support of social and emotional developmental health needs of students. Our priority need is to strengthen the collection and use of data to proactively identify trends and target supports in order to bolster the staff’s ability to address the needs of all students, and cultivate social and emotional developmental health and academic success for all learners. Thus, it is necessary for all stakeholders to define the critical success indicators and data points that will support the proactive identification of social and emotional developmental health needs of all students as well as the provision of supports and services. Different members of our staff meet to plan and monitor supports for students. A review of documents showed that our grade level advisors, attendance committee, faculty Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) as well as staff, meet weekly. However, there is minimal evidence of how we systemically integrate and share the goals, agendas, topics, and outcomes of our meetings to support and respond to the social and emotional developmental health needs of our students. Over the past years our yearly attendance has improved from 86.0% in 2011 to 91.2% in 2018. In collaboration with our Community School Director and Lead CBO, New York Edge and Northwell LIJ, we strategically organize our work to ensure collaboration among all stakeholders in support of social and emotional developmental health needs of our students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Our approach to culture building and social-emotional support is informed by a theory of action. If we provide targeted professional learning to teachers to increase their capacity to understand the role their emotions play in co-creating the learning environments within our school community, then children will receive the appropriate supports needed to express feelings more responsibly and contribute to a positive school climate and culture. Strategies and activities will include: organizing, analyzing and disseminating all areas of data: demographic, student learning, perception, and process so that all stakeholders are able to understand the needs of all students. We utilize and disaggregated data to monitor all systems that support student social and emotional health. For example, attendance, participation in after school programs and activities, are key indicators that will guide our youth development work. Effective use of school counselors including social workers are used to support individual student academic program planning, collaboration with teachers to present lessons and work with students, addressing absence, lateness and use in the ASCA standards. Training for all staff in classroom management and behavioral interventions --Opportunities for student voice and student choice --Transitional supports (elementary to middle, middle to high school) --High school visits --Trips to colleges and universities for students -- Student activities/community involvement/after school opportunities (August-September, ongoing) --Attendance plan (September-June) --Guidance and crisis intervention plan (September-June) --Establishment of student personal goals and future plans (September-June) --Monthly parental opportunities (workshops, breakfasts, evening events) -- Student recognition events and celebrations (January and June) --Identification of community service and volunteer opportunities This work will also supported New York Edge as our partner CBO, and the Ramapo for Children program, which will build our capacity to promote restorative practices. The Ramapo for Children program will help build capacity to identify, create, and implement restorative justice action plans, including teams for improving school culture and impact measures as attendance rates and suspensions, thus positively impacting student achievement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus New York Edge Daytime and after school-Academic enrichment program and homework support. Northwell Health, LIJ Provides comprehensive Medical and Mental Health Services Urban Arts Smartworks Ramapo Fyrezone Performing Arts Smart works Provides an art program for students to build literacy and content area through art. Provides training and guidance for an Emotionally Responsive Practice, Social Emotional Services. Offered as a performing arts choice, students are able to learn the art of acting, chorus, and video production. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? In collaboration with our Community School Director and lead CBO, New York Edge, we strategically organize our efforts to ensure collaboration among all stakeholders in support of social and emotional developmental health needs of our students and families. We regularly communication through a variety of platforms to engage and outreach to families and communities regarding school and community events. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in professional learning around social emotional learning using the Ramapo toolbox yielding a 15 % increase in teacher's response to our school survey question "teachers say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school." Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? School Quality Guide Performance Index on State ELA Exam Performance Index on State Math Exam Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Differentiated Professional Learning Teachers All Differentiated Professional Learning Teachers All Differentiated Professional Learning Teachers All 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Educational Consultants Educational Consultants Administration Sept. 2018-May 2019 Sept. 2018-May 2019 Sept. 2018 - May 2019 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Cabinet meetings, Quarterly Data Reviews Teacher Team Meetings Cabinet Meetings How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly newsletters, invitations to visit school, Student Led-Conferences, Remind App Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Our parents, teachers, and support staff members could not clearly articulate awareness of a systemic approach or their individual role in a system for addressing social and emotional developmental health needs. When interviewed by the IIT, our members of the student support staff did not clearly articulate a system to proactively identify, respond to, and monitor the provision of supports and services to meet social and emotional developmental health needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  As a school community we have developed structures to collect, analyze and utilize data to identify and meet the social and emotional developmental health needs of our students. Our attendance data is collected and monitored based on a school-wide focus and activities to improve our students’ desire to come to school. We use Swagger Bucks as a school-wide motivation technique for reward and incentives however, we need to work on gathering data that provides statistical information on any trends or areas of growth that demonstrate progression or regression by individual students or school-wide behaviors beyond average attendance. We will continue to define and develop specific critical success indicators and data points that will support the proactive identification of social and emotional developmental health needs of our students as well as the provision of supports and services. We also need to develop protocols as well as multiple communication systems to ensure that our staff conducts regular monitoring and adjustments of services for all students. Our ideal school would be best described as a place that is safe, conducive to learning; one that appropriately responds to the myriad of needs of each student. Each student and his or her family is well known by at least one adult within our school community. Families are welcome within our school community. Continued growth is a constant expectation for each stakeholder within our community. Aiming to improve as individuals and as a school community is evidenced by ongoing workshops for parents, teachers, and school leaders. Sustainable partnerships with organizations in our Far Rockaway community provide resources to the immediate and long-term needs of students and their families. New York Edge has partnered with us as our Lead CBO in our efforts to provide quality instruction, meaningful supports for all scholars. Currently our SASF partnership has a primary focus on providing success mentoring, after school programming, parent engagement, and attendance support for our school community. We have additional CBO partnerships who help us to sustain and support the social and emotional growth and health of our students in a variety of ways. The NorthWell Health Clinic (LIJ) in our building partners with us to provide a multitude of workshops for our students ranging from academic support, bullying, peer pressure, etc. Northwell provides mental health service to our students and their families. We Got Game With a Message Anti-Violence program is a partnership who provides workshops for our incoming grade 6 scholars to make a smooth transition into middle school, learn of our community and cultural norms of behavior including techniques for conflict resolution, handling peer pressure, anti-violence, etc. Our partnerships have also helped us to significantly reduce our total number of suspensions from 280 total suspensions for the 2010-2011 school year to 50 total suspensions for the 2018-2019 school year. Student voice and leadership will be supported through every facet our curriculum. Through scheduled time to develop their character, our scholars are encouraged to reflect on their strengths and areas of growth and how their school can best support their development. These activities afford us the opportunity to hear the needs of our students and determine the best way to meet them. Our MS 53 Student Government contains scholars who lead to share their thoughts for how our school could be improved. Our general student body will hear each candidate’s thoughts and evaluate who they believe will best represent their values. This process allows the voice of the ensure student body to be heard. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Students develop leadership skills as they campaign for their desired office. They develop communication skills as they convey their values and beliefs and plans for the school. All staff members, including each candidate’s advisory supports with the creation and development of initiatives to best meet the needs of all students. This year we will continue to perform our Student-Led Conferences which replaced our Parent-Teacher Conferences. Our students will take the lead and engage in conversations with their parents regarding their academic progress, strengths, and areas of weakness. Our Student-led conferences will be ongoing throughout the school year. In addition, to support with behavior the students involved in the most incidents due to poor social-emotional skills will be provided with a "coach" to provide check-ins on a regular basis for support. Additionally, data will be complied on triggers and ways to support their social and emotional health. Training for all staff in classroom management and behavioral interventions Opportunities for student voice and student choice Transitional supports (middle to high school, high school to college, career readiness) High school visits--Trips to colleges and universities for students-- Student activities/community involvement/after-school opportunities Attendance plan; Rewards and incentives for students that arrive to school on time and consistently 95% or more of the school year. (Weekly Game Truck Reward, Pizza parties, monthly trips, etc.) Guidance and crisis intervention plan (September-June) Establishment of student personal goals and future plans (September-June) Monthly parental opportunities (workshops, breakfasts, evening events) Student recognition events and celebrations (January and June) Identification of community service and volunteer opportunities At the beginning of the school year our students were provided with a social-emotional development survey to assess their social emotional development and classroom behavior. Students will be surveyed again in June with the expectation that they will provide more positive responses due to our character education program Connect With Kids as well as our other programs in place to support social-emotional development. We will use the (OORS) Online Occurrence Reporting System to monitor and measure our number of student incidents and suspensions. Each month we will look at the total number of incidents and compare them to the previous year. We will continue to focus on attendance and will also use it as a measure of social-emotional development. Teachers, community partners, and school leaders will meet bi-monthly to discuss and analyze trends of student behavior and engagement as evidenced by teacher anecdotals, PPT Referrals , Grade Advisor Records, and Student Academic Report Cards. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Through these in-depth discussions around student behavior and engagement with teachers, community partners, and school leaders high leverage initiatives will be implemented, monitored, and revised to ensure the needs of students and families are met. Guidance Counselors and Grade Advisors will meet bi-weekly to discuss anecdotal records and provide group and individualized interventions and support to all students. Teachers continue to make phone calls home to absent students daily. Our AmeriCorps Liaison also makes calls to absent students each day. The attendance teacher and School Social Worker make home visits to families for which there is chronic absenteeism, no working phone numbers and/or no parental contact. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, there will be a 15% increase from 35% to 50% of teachers who will participate in professional learning around social emotional learning using the Ramapo toolbox and who will respond favorably to a school-wide survey about whether or not students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students in our school. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-wide scholar survey Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Summary of strengths and needs as reflected in the HEDI ratings include the following: Currently, all of our teachers in Advance have been rated Effective based on the combined MOTP and MOSL data, which is a strength. However, not all of the teachers were rated Effective for MOTP and MOSL, so a part of the action plan will be to target 7 teachers that were rated effective overall, but rated Developing for MOTP. According to our 2017-18 Quality Review, we received Proficient in 4.2 (Teacher Teams) with the following evidence: "Teachers engage in weekly team meetings by grade and subject to collaboratively plan and conduct inquiry using established structures and protocols. A review of observation reports, lesson plans, and class visits demonstrated that teachers have made improvements in writing learning objectives that align to the tasks and are asking higher-level questions. For example, a first year teacher moved from a Developing rating in demonstrating knowledge of content in November 2017 to an effective rating in January 2018." Teachers plan and deliver CCLS aligned lessons. According to the 2018 NYC school survey, students and teachers also report that the learning environment is safe. Now we must ensure that all teachers uniformly provide tailored instruction that meet the needs of all students. In addition, a robust and formal analysis of formative and summative student performance data by teachers will strengthen the provision of multiple entry points with differentiation to meet the needs of diverse learners and extend learning for higher performing students. Our aim is to work with teachers and expand and formalize efforts to identify and respond to the diverse needs of all students with instructional practices that acknowledge multiple entry points, invite values sharing, and support success 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  for all. Further, we will work together to expand and formalize protocols and procedures within and across all subject areas and grade levels for using formative and summative assessments to monitor and adjust daily instruction and ensure all teachers provide regular feedback to students so that they can improve their work and take more ownership of their own learning. Based on the 2018 Quality Review for Quality Indicator 4.2 rated Proficient, "teachers analyze lesson plans, develop common lesson plans per grade and subjects, create tasks, create common assessments, and analyze student work. In addition, teacher teams also engage in the planning, providing and receiving of professional learning. Across the school, teachers use protocols to analyze and discuss student work which result from common assessments and performance tasks across the grade. Item analysis data is compiled and shared from common assessments including pre, post and mid unit assessments and performance trends across items and classes, which impact future lesson and unit planning. In 2018-2019, teachers will continue to meet weekly in Teacher Teams to ensure that instructional practices and strategies are common-core aligned and provide a variety of entry points that meet the needs of diverse learners. Teachers will continue to use protocols to analyze student work, create common assessments, and determine instructional strategies. Teachers will continue to engage in weekly Professional Learning with the ultimate goal of supporting student achievement through improving teacher practice. In the school quality guide, we scored above the city average in Peer Collaboration and Innovation and Collective Responsibility based on responses within the section for Collaborative Teachers, which is a strength that we want to sustain and capitalize upon and hopefully transfer to other areas. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? It is our vision that based upon the analysis of student work and the results of common assessments, teachers will identify instructional strategies and conduct action research in order to verify the viability of such strategies to improve student outcomes. One organizational feature of our school is the intentional scheduling of the teachers to meet and plan by grade and subject level teams during common meeting times. A second organizational feature of our school is the implementation of guided reading during instruction. A third organizational feature that supports our students is our inquiry teams. Using an item analysis approach, teachers analyze student work to determine areas where students are struggling and not meeting the standards. Teachers re-teach the concept and make adjustments to the curricula. Teachers are providing opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students through small group instruction and one to one conferencing. Teachers plan for small group intervention during scheduled content learning time that is prototype driven. All classrooms have libraries with culturally relevant books to support all student reading levels and content areas. Higher achieving students have choice in texts they select and are able to use myON as an additional online library as well. Teachers create clear expectations for student behavior in each classroom. Ramapo is providing professional development and compiling data for school leadership and staff that allows for targeted intervention and action steps. Students receive incentives when they are positively participating in the classroom discussions, completing class work, and supporting classmates. Students, teachers, and support staff are able to file reports of bullying and targeted staff work to provide interventions and supplemental resources to affected students via Skedula, on online grading platform that allows for the submission of anecdotals. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Each year we align our instructional focus with identified areas in need of improvement as indicated in our most recent Quality Review report. In the instructional cabinet, we will be providing a cycle of professional learning around component 1e, which distinguishes the new from the the veteran teachers. New teachers are being in led in professional learning by two administrators focusing on the more fundamental aspects of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, while the veteran teachers are being introduced to ideas behind Understanding By Design (backwards planning) while at the same time reviewing the Danielson Framework and approaching instructional practice with a diversified and more informed approach. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? School leaders and instructional cabinet members will meet weekly to analyze trends in school wide data so that they can better support teachers through weekly professional learning and teacher team meetings. We are currently structuring a system for common planning, which happens everyday, to include a cycle in which 2 days are for content planning, 2 days are to focus on targeting ELL's and SWD's in the curriculum and everyday teaching, and 2 days for common planning in the grade. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? One organizational feature of our school is the intentional scheduling of the teachers to meet and plan by grade and subject level teams during common meeting times. Teachers use protocols to analyze and discuss student work which result from common assessments and performance tasks across the grade. Such conversations yield implications for classroom instruction. Item analysis data is compiled and shared from common assessments including pre, post and mid-unit assessments and performance trends across items and classes impact future lesson planning. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Creating a schedule which provides teachers with multiple opportunities to collaborate including professional learning sessions, weekly teacher team meetings, and bi-monthly professional learning communities. Teachers will use protocols to analyze and discuss student work, with a focus on literacy in the content areas, and effective discussion and questioning techniques. Such conversations will yield implications for classroom instruction. As a result of the 3 tiered cycle of common planning (2 days for content discussions, 2 days for discussion of ELL's and SWD's and 2 days for discussion around issue with the grade) and professional learning around 1e, teachers are able to collaborate in content area teams, grade teams and in teams designed to develop strategies for ELL's and SWD's every week, resulting not only in the structure for teacher teams horizontally and vertically, but in training that enhances instructional knowledge. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Lesson Plans to ensure that lesson plans are CCLS-aligned and provide appropriate scaffolds Benchmark Data to use data to inform instructional decisions Portfolios to use student work to inform instructional decisions Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of all teachers actively participating in collaborative teacher teams with a focus on higher-order thinking questions and effective discussion techniques, at least 50% of teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3b, as measured by end of year 2018-2019 overall MOTP Advance Ratings. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index on NY State ELA exam Performance index on NY State Math exam Framework: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Use of Rubicon Atlas to monitor weekly progress. Artifacts, schedules, observations, feedback Frequent cycles of observation from peers and administrators, quarterly data team meetings Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly collaborative planning among teachers for all teachers. All Teachers Performance Index on State ELA and Math Exam Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff Framework: Collaborative Teachers Performance Index on State ELA and Math Exam Framework: Collaborative Teachers Performance Index on State ELA and Math Exam All Teachers Weekly classroom inter-visitations internally and externally allows teachers to observe their colleagues and teachers in best practices. Differentiated professional development plan All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff --Weekly professional development-facilitated teachers and administrators. --Monitor professional development in teacher teams and division meetings Identify successes and challenges in practicing these strategies and discuss how to improve them for better outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  One hour of Expanded Learning Time for all students will include a variety of pedagogical strategies to meet the interest and needs of our students. Teachers will work with parents during their Parent Engagement time by highlighting their child’s specific needs. Also, showing them skills and strategies that they can reinforce at home to help their child to become successful in school. Teachers will receive literacy support from Teaching Matters in order to build effective teacher collaborative practices All Teachers and students Performance Index on State ELA and Math Exam Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team & Teaching Staff All Teachers All Parents Performance Index on State ELA and Math Exam Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator & Community Director All ELA teachers Performance on NYS ELA exam Jan 2019-June 2019 Educational Consultant Frequent cycles of observation from peers and administrators, quarterly data team meetings Increase in parent attendance to community and school events, increase in student achievement Teacher informal and formal observations, formative student assessments (pre and post) 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Newsletters from the Principal and parent coordinator, us of the "Remind App," SKEDULA/Pupilpath, Invitations to Family Engagement workshops, Student-Led Conferences (At-least 3 per year). Teachers/ groups of teachers will work with parents during their weekly Parent Engagement time by highlighting their child’s specific needs. Also, showing them skills and strategies that they can reinforce at home to help their child to become successful in school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds by October 30, 2018 so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next, we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Additionally, we will access Leadership support in the use of curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: support in on-site feedback given regularly to school leaders, support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning, support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers, and identification of parental resources. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, as a result of all new teachers actively participating in collaborative teacher teams with planning of activities that represent higher order thinking, at least 70% of new teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3b, as measured by Advance observation reports between September 2018 and February 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE observation reports, Notes to teachers, Informal Classroom Visits Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Summary of strengths and needs as reflected in the HEDI ratings include: Strengths According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Review, "School leaders consistently communicate and model high expectations for staff through use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, with a focus on using a variety of questions, assessments, and feedback. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for all students and provides ongoing feedback and support. The impact of this work is that communication structures around high expectations and training results in a system of accountability. High expectations for all students are maintained and supported through effective guidance and feedback so that students are being prepared for the next level. Additionaly, "frequent classroom observations and feedback from administrators based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching contain specific language from the rubric, evidence from the classroom observation that supports the rating, alignment to instructional shifts and the school’s instructional focus, and actionable next steps. These are then addressed in subsequent classroom observations." Additionally, in the 2017-2018 School Quality Review, "School leaders provide training and consistently communicate high expectations for teaching and learning via weekly memos and observation feedback. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture of high expectations via morning announcements, academic non-negotiables, and success criteria. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  The impact of these practices are that leaders hold teachers accountable for expectations and faculty and staff offer ongoing support and guidance that prepare students for the next level of learning. Over the past two years, as reported in the School Quality Review, "Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for all students and provides ongoing feedback and support. As a result, our communication structures around high expectations and training results in a system of accountability. High expectations for all students are maintained and supported through effective guidance and feedback so that students are being prepared for the next level." According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, under the Framework Element of Effective School Leadership, the following are strengths. 92% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings 90% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making 93% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school 90% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school 80% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning 88% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress 88% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school’s instructional vision 88% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school 96% of teacher say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders Within the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the school received a score of “Proficient” on the following two indicators from the 2017-2018 School Quality Review. “How well does the school allocate and manage resources? “How well does the school identify, track, and meet its goals? According to 2017-2018 NYS Exam data, MS 53 met the following Renewal-EMS Benchmarks: Leading indicator targets aligned to our Framework for Great Schools:  Collaborative Teachers Benchmark 3.00 to 3.30 Score: 3.76  Rigorous Instruction Benchmark 3:00 to 3.30 Score: 3.72 Student Achievement Metrics: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51   Performance Index on State ELA Exam Benchmark: 52 to 56 Score: 59.96 With regard to the 9th Grade Credits of former 8th Graders, there has been a steady increase over the past 4 years with the last year increasing 2% from 80% to 82% in 2017. Based upon the data above, the school has met 6 out of the 8 Renewal Benchmarks for the 2017-2018 school year. Based on this needs assessment, areas in need of growth are school-wide attendance, mathematics performance and an area of focus for attention based on our Quality Review is in the area of teacher pedagogy. The school-wide PD plan includes offerings aligned with the goals of our Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). School leaders continue to use observation data to provide targeted professional development for teachers. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Elmore’s (2000) five principles of distributive leadership continue to be one of the research based models used to guide our vision of effective leadership work. Elmore believes that distributed leadership plays a role in generating instructional improvement (Lashway 2003). Distributive leadership maintains that instructional improvement is now the measure of leadership success. The instructional process must be guided, rather than controlled by administrators. All the leadership must be organized around a common task and shared common values. Creating this unity is the principal’s core responsibility. Thus, the research based instructional activities used to support our school has been selected based on the premise that when school leaders focus strategic and shared efforts around student outcomes they create an environment that allows all students to achieve. Additionally, Ronald Heifetz's description of "Adaptive Leadership" in his book, The Practice of Adaptive Leadership: Tools and Tactics for Changing Your Organization and the World is used as a guide to inform the transformational process of managing, guiding and supporting the change process of all stakeholders in a school community toward a shared goal. Professional Learning Communities (PLC’s) (DuFour & Eaker, 1998) further bolster and guide leadership efforts in our school. Specifically, the school leaders work with all stakeholders in creating a collaborative community of learners. The school leaders leverages both human and financial resources that serve all students in order to provide a safe learning environment and a culture that supports teaching and learning. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Communicating, monitoring and supporting the understanding and alignment of all school practices, programs, human and capital resources toward our school's vision, mission and instructional focus. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52 Monthly cabinet meetings, period communication via Principal's Memo, Instructional Coach / Peer Collaborative Teacher What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Monthly extended cabinet meetings, daily communication via Principal's Memo, Instructional Coach/ Teacher Leadership meetings How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Monthly cabinet meetings, weekly communication via Principal's Memo, Weekly Instructional Coach/ Teacher Leadership meetings, Community School Director attends all cabinet meetings How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly Weekly Engage teacher/ admin leadership in norming the observation process What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Periodic review of student work Review alignment between student work and CCLS-standards and rubrics Teachers/ Teacher leaders/ Instructional Coaches/ Admin Analysis of benchmark assessments assess progress towards meeting CCLS standards Teachers/teacher leaders/admin/coaches How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Regularly review student IEPs to ensure students' needs are met and analyze baseline/diagnostic assessment data Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, according to the 2019 School Quality Guide, there will be a 20% increase (44% to 65%) of teachers who say that "the principal knows what's going on in their classroom". 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53 Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index on State ELA exam Performance index on State Math exam Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal will use a weekly schedule to record all classroom visits Principal will attend teacher planning meetings All classes ELA and Math Performance Index Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers ELA and Math Performance Index Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in teacher aggregate score on Danielson Framework, Increase in student achievement Principal will communicate feedback to teachers about classroom visits All Teachers ELA and Math Performance Index Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and admin team Weekly memo's Feedback emails and notes 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Newsletters, Remind Phone App, Quarterly updates, Bi-Annual State of the School Address Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, according to a survey provided to teachers, at least 50% of teachers will say that "the principal knows what's going on in their classroom". Results of teacher Survey Principal Observation / Classroom Visit logs and Schedule Feedback meeting attendance sheets Feedback emails Mid-Year Teacher Conferences to discuss progress and ADVANCE ratings Notes to individual teachers following classroom visits Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation schedules and logs of classroom visits Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength: According to our 2017-18 School Quality Guide, our strengths as it relates to Strong Family-Community Ties were that 90% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher and 89% of families say they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. Strengths include quarterly progress reports that are distributed to parents to formally report on student progress. Parents report that a basic knowledge of the grading policy and state scoring system is required to adequately understand their students’ strengths and needs. Parents and staff confirmed that the school leaders share data with them related to attendance and quality review ratings during SLT and faculty meetings. Outreach efforts such as newsletters, flyers posted in stores, backpack letters, at least two phone blasts each week, PTA and SLT meetings, repeated announcements, and parent coordinator interactions are used to promote, inform, and nurture the increased understanding of the parents. Every teacher makes phone calls to students absent from their classes each day and record their efforts in a parent contact log. Collaboration occurs between school leadership and the Parent Coordinator to review results from the Learning Environment survey, to identify priorities, and set goals for increasing outreach efforts. Communication between home and school is regular and is provided in home languages. Our school hosts student-led conferences twice each year. Fall conferences average approximately 100 parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Our SLT has a regular parent representation of between two and three members. Some parents reported that they are informed of school goals and plans for improvement. Multiple workshops have been prepared and presented to support parents in understanding the CCLS and curriculum programs. Need: According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, only 69% of families reported that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Only 77% of families of a child with an IEP say that our school offers a wide variety of activities and services to help improve life outcomes for their child. Only 86% of families reported that the school offers a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school. We still need to formalize a school-wide communication plan that systematically shares information about the expectations of the school and the need for partnership with parents and families across all grades and departments. We will build on our strengths, (parent involvement in SLC's and attendance at a general school meeting or event), to communicate to families the programs and extracurricular activities that we offer and the impact those programs are having on student achievement. We must ensure that all parents have the supports needed to understand all of the information presented. A good deal of informal communication takes place among members of the staff, and now we will ensure that formal efforts are in place to integrate and communicate student and family data in a cohesive manner. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? We are committed to the inclusion of all stakeholders participating in the development of our students and their academic success. We are also firmly committed to preparing all students for college and professional careers. It is our vision that in partnership with our families, we foster a community of excellence by promoting achievement in academic and character education in a safe and supportive learning environment. We envision our Community School organization to work along with our school's administration as a cohesive unit, to ultimately improve the social, emotional, and academic performance of our students and families. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Frequent outreach to parents from teachers, school messenger, and Community School Director. All staff members will fully understand that MS53 is the hub of the community. All staff members will continue to follow protocols to welcome community members into our building, beginning with school safety, the main office staff, and all other stakeholders. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Our Parents Association, School Leadership Team and Lead CBO(New York Edge) will continue to foster and support family leadership through meeting and other school wide events. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Back to School Night, Student-Led Conferences, Parent letters, school messenger, community events. Staff members are expected to attend school events and encourage and share curriculum expectations with families on a monthly basis. The distribution of our faculty handbook which outlines school policies, procedures, and tools for all stakeholders to engage in school activities that support high expectations. Efforts to communicate high expectations and engage families will include the following: · School wide grading policy is communicated early in the school year to students and families. · Families are invited to honor roll awards each marking period to celebrate student achievement. · Student government allows students a voice in school decision making. · School messenger system allows communication with families that strengthen the home-school connection. · School wide goals and expectations are visible in the classrooms and hallways. · Community member agreements are posted in each classroom and in the hallways. · Administrators support teachers to ensure that both quantitative and qualitative data, and a comprehensive knowledge of students informs instruction. · Provide a monthly newsletter to parents outlining upcoming events and expectations for success. · Setting SMART goals with/and for the class with timely assessments and actionable feedback. · Contact with parents regarding all aspects of the student’s educational practices. · Daily phone calls to parents of late and absent students. · Weekly cabinet meetings focused on instructional outcomes and to monitor progress towards our goal in this area. · Parents have weekly time scheduled as per the NYC DOE schedule for teacher meetings. Families will continue to partner with our school and Lead CBO, New York Edge, by participating in mid and end of year presentations. Additionally, parents will be invited to attend monthly Student-Led conferences to monitor the progress of their child and to attend Publishing Parties and other academic celebrations every month to support and encourage their child's success. Spanish speaking staff members are on site to support with translation at every event. All communication is also sent out in atleastat least 2 languages (English and Spanish). What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Student Led Conferences Weekly parent workshops Monthly SLT meetings Increase parent involvement and awareness of their child's academic progress Increase parent involvement and awareness Increase parent involvement and awareness of school wide issues 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Student Led Conferences, weekly parent workshops, monthly SLTmeetings Family partnerships with CBO: Monthly community events, TRIAD services, May Day Adventure Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? yes What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Our vision is to empower the adults and families in our community by providing monthly workshops and information to increase access to adult education classes. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Report cards, progress reports, student led conferences, parent outreach time. Teachers use the Remind App as well as Skedula/ Pupilpath to communicate with parents on a regular basis. All parents were given invitation codes to Pupilpath at the beginning of the year and this information is redistributed throughout the year. Our school messenger system generates a report to communicate how many messages were successfully delivered, and we utilize this data to obtain and correct numbers in ATS. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 89% of families, an increase of 3%, will say that "their school offers a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school" as measured by the 2019 School Quality Guide. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index or state ELA exam Performance index for state Math exam Increase in Student Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60 Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students and Families ELA and Math Performance Index Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration/ Parent Coordinator/CBO Grades 6-8 ELA and Math Performance Index Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration/ Parent Coordinator/ LERU Consultant / CBO Grades 6-8 ELA and Math Performance Index Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration/ Parent Coordinator / CBO How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) increase in parent attendance at planned school-wide events increase in parent attendance at planned school-wide events increase in parent attendance at planned school-wide events Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Periodic school surveys distributed to families to identify their needs and concerns. Parent Coordinator will provide workshops for parents and collaborate with the Parent Assn. LERU Services will host events throughout the school year to get to know families and their needs. These events allow parents to participate in school activities. Ensure effective communication with families in a timely manner through newsletters, fliers, School Messenger, letters, emails, and the school website to address attendance, academic performance, and behavior monitoring to support struggling students and all students in the school. The school will communicate positive behaviors to families as students meet those benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, after surveying our families, at least 50% will say that "their school offers a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school" as measured by the 2019 School Quality Guide. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School will administer parent survey in January of 2019, specifically regarding whether the school offers a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of male students in the push-able range will make one(1) year gain as measured by the i-Ready Benchmark assessments. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our proposed ELT program will increase the amount and quality of learning time, by providing an enriched and accelerated curriculum through different programs and activities, thus meeting the educational needs of all learners. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our extended learning program has the following community partner: New York Edge. We have a shared vision to provide students with activities to support the common core and the social emotional aspect of their lives. Our ELT program’s academic content aligns with CCLS and the Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools. Our Teachers and lead CBO are providing a content tutoring initiative which provides our students with an after school opportunity for small group academic intervention. Tutors will engage in professional learning provided by our Community School Director. Our proposed ELT program will increase the amount and quality of learning time throughout the school day, by providing an enriched and accelerated curriculum through different programs and activities, thus meeting the educational needs of all learners. Our program will be based on research from the National Center for Research on Evaluation Standards and student testing (CRESST) report reflecting on two decades of evaluations on out-of-school-time programs. The following research-based instructional strategies and activities are characteristic of successful after school programming, which we will be embedding throughout the school day: Clearly defined program goals and funding that aligns to them Strong, experienced leadership of the ELT program are able to effectively communicate and manage staff and students. Staff members will be strategic about motivating students. On Wednesdays, all students will have a double period block in which they engage in performing arts and enrichment activities of their choice, facilitated by our community partners. In addition to to these enrichment activities, our students will also be provided with a Character Education program. Students will engage in a character education program once a week. This program will be facilitated by a classroom teacher that has formed a connection with the students. Students will be exposed to relevant topics faced by teenagers in their community that will support their social and emotional growth, including adopting a Growth Mindset. Student progress will be communicated to parents during the designated parent outreach time on Monday's, during Parent Outreach Conferences throughout the year, and will be showcased during our annual May Day community event. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Key Personnel includes: Principal, Assistant Principals, Attendance Team, External partnerships, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Teachers Our lead CBO and Community School Director will be providing a content tutoring initiative which lowers the student to teacher ratio, allowing students to receive small group academic instruction. Tutors will engage in professional learning provided by our Community School Director. The program will be evaluated through ELA and Math Benchmark assessments. Student growth will be monitored by content area teacher. Benchmark Assessment results will be uploaded on Rubicon Atlas to ensure all teachers have access to data. Data will be used to drive further instruction. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. August 2018: Review of Data and identification of target population September 2018- Outreach to parents to inform them of changes; ELT embedded throughout the day September 2018 through June 2019 -Delivery of the program January 2019 - Midyear assessment of student progress through ELA and Math benchmarks February 2019 - Review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. May-June 2019- End of year assessment of student progress through ELA and Math benchmarks June 2019- Data Analysis Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next we allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction, coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher, Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By January 2019, 25% of male students in the push-able range will make at least .5 year gain as measured by the i-Ready Math benchmark assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready computer based Math benchmark assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of the CBO implementing at least 3 school-wide initiatives, there will be a 1% increase in our school-wide attendance as measured by New Visions Sorter Tool. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance index on state ELA exams Performance index on state Math exams Attendance Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population New York Edge All Students Up to 50 students at any given time. Up to 30 students at any given time. Scope of Service Implement school wide attendance initiatives including individual and class incentives. Attendance campaign will be implemented for students and their families. Will implement Success Mentor model. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  All Teachers Ramapo for Children Up to 100 students Community Mediation Center Leru Multi-Service Agency Up to active cases at any given time. NorthWell Health Clinic All Students Success Mentors will be assigned cohort of students that have been identified as either at risk of becoming or currently chronically absent Implement sports theme after school program based on a three season model offering Flag Football, Basketball and Soccer Build school wide capacity to promote restorative practices. Provide comprehensive after school program focusing on academic enrichment, enrichment and recreation. individual counseling school based health and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68 mental health support 2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The process for selecting the Community School Director was highly collaborative involving several key stakeholders including the principal and the Department of Education Office of Community Schools Program Manager.The process involved jointly agreeing on key responsibilities, qualifications and credentials. This in turn informed the design of the job description. The process for conducting an asset and needs assessment and coordinating activities are tasks that have been identified as critical to the implementation of the Community Schools strategy at 53Q. The Community School Director will lead the process involving key participants among teachers, staff, student and their families along with other CBO partners. The process is viewed as ongoing beginning with the results from the June 2018 Community School Forum feedback from parents, students, staff and community members. The results of this work along with critical data points such as attendance will ultimately be translated into an action plan. Additionally, the Community School Director will lead provider meetings with representation from CBO partners and school providers to establish the process for ensuring alignment, planning and monitoring impact. 2. Our ELT has been moved to the end of our school day so that we can provide a variety of enrichment programs for our MS 53 scholars. Additionally, CBO partners, Community Mediation Services and New York Edge will support the ELT program while also "extending" ELT like services into the after school time. Northwell LIJ, and Leru Multi-Service Center will offer health, and mental health to 53Q scholars in need of support. Students will be identified by a mental health committee which will also meet to monitor their progress. Ramapo for Children will conduct comprehensive assessments with the goal of building community among all 53Q staff while guiding the process of developing restorative practices. 3. The Community School at 53Q will host Welcome Back events and parent orientations during the Fall that will allow for opportunities to conduct the asset and needs assessment. Parents will be actively recruited to be part of formal structures . They will also be actively recruited to attend the classes and workshops during the school year that will be part of the community school program design. Monthly opportunities for parents to meet with the principal will also 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  be pursued. The Community School Director will work closely with the DOE Parent Coordinator and the Parent Teacher Association to not only support their work but to find opportunities to enhance their efforts by investing financial and human resources. Ongoing communication and a culture of “customer service” will be implemented to ensure that families feel respected and welcome. 4. An expectation has already been established that the Community School Director will be a participant in all current school governance structures such as Principal Cabinet and SLT. The CSD will also participate in student support meetings such as Attendance Meeting and Student Intervention Teams. Other vehicles such as a Mental Health Committee will be implemented to ensure that students needs, are being addressed and that interventions are reviewed for progress. Formal, and ongoing check-ins with the principal to discuss progress, problem solve and to jointly plan occur on a daily and weekly basis. The CSD will be expected to master the Data Sorter ensuring that the school obtains a comfort level with the tool and that the data is being used to make informed decisions. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Several partners including the Principal, Assistant Principals, the Lead CBO, NY Edge, MS 53 staff, School Leadership Team, Community Mediation Services will support the community school work. In the area of ELT; NY Edge , and Community Mediation Center will work closely together with 53Q. NY Edge will leverage resources and partnership opportunities. Mental health team meetings co-chaired by the Community School Mental Health Coordinator will provide the organizing support to ensure that students are connected to services. The CSD will lead the effort to organize supports and opportunities for parents and families by reaching out to potential partners. The process of identifying additional partners will be an ongoing effort. 2. The Community School Team will be composed of the following members: - Andrea Yard, 53Q Principal - Grace Williams, 53Q Assistant Principal - Aulandar Young, Community School Director - Mona Prophete, Community School Mental Health Coordinator 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  3. It is the intention of 53Q Community School to do the following: Implement the Success Mentors initiative to work with students at risk of or chronically absent.   Assess Attendance Team to determine if changes need to be made to improve monitoring and progress of   students at risk. Implement the use of the Data Sorter. Ensure that key staff are trained and that there is a comfort level with using the data to inform the work Implement a school wide attendance initiative that will include incentives for individual students and classes, assembly celebrations, and visuals around attendance. Actively seek to engage parents/caregivers in the effort to improve attendance through ongoing outreach. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The following resources will be needed in order to implement an effective community school program. Sufficient pedagogical support staff, Instructional materials, a time line for implementation and Community involvement via Professional development support for parent engagement. Adjustments to staff schedules will have to be in place in order to ensure that students are grouped based on needs, academic performance levels, and behavior. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Summer 2018—creating plan for identified Lead CBO to support school September 2018—begin role out of plan December 2018—monitor plan and make revisions if necessary January 2019 – June 2019 - Phase 2 – Programs continue. Needs Assessment. CS Forum Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All mandated students, students in need as determined by administration and teachers All mandated students, students in need as determined by administration and teachers All mandated students, students in need as determined by administration and teachers All mandated students, students in need as determined by administration and teachers All mandated students, students in need as determined by administration and teachers Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) I-Ready Diagnostic and instruction online One-to-one Before, during, and afterschool Small Group I-Ready Diagnostic and instruction online One-to-one Before, during, and afterschool Small Group SMART Science Small Group - In class Before, during, and afterschool One-to-one Before, during, and afterschool Small Group One-to-one During school Small Group Guidance counselor will provide individual and small group counseling to students in grades 6-8 that have been identified as having, emotional and social issues. Through play therapy, games and dramatizations students will be able to discuss their concerns and work 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  out their problems. Close attention is given to the relationship of the student to other family members and their peers. Therefore communication with the parents and teachers of the targeted students is critical to the guidance intervention plan. Based on patterns of negative behavior or social and emotional decline, Students are referred to the Child Study Team for further support as well as outside agencies and treatment centers. School Psychologistevaluates AIS students that have been referred for and evaluation and provides information on the psycho-social development of the student. The School Social Worker will provide counseling services in grades 6-8to students that are demonstrating patterns of social and behavioral misconduct as well as anxiety or sadness. Through individual and small group counseling the students will receive a therapeutic intervention program that supports self-esteem and coping 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  mechanisms and behavior modification strategies. Working closely with the family and classroom teacher is part of the process used to support the student. The School Nurse provides the health services as needed 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 35 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, free uniforms, metro cards, free bookbags and school supplies, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: To recruit teachers, we work closely with our NYC DOE human resources point, traditional teacher education programs, and alternative licensure programs. We have attended hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. We continue to work closely with our Human Resource Department to ensure that all required documentation and assessment deadlines are met. We also have an active Hiring Committee which consists of teachers, administrators, and other school personal such as the school psychologist. Last year, as a result of hosting Teaching Academy fellows, who served as student teachers year long, we hired one teacher from the candidate pool of three assigned to our school. This helps build pipelines with universities and have the opportunity to work closely with pre service teachers as possible hires in the future. Retention and Support: In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the supports and strategies to grow professionally, we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers provided by other teachers, administrators, as well as support staff. Mentoring is implemented as per teacher requirements. Non-tenured teachers are given opportunities to learn about the tenure process and our network provides support in this area. Teachers are provided with PL in instruction, classroom management, social emotional learning, parental involvement, and all areas of data use. Determination of Assignments: As an administrative team, we are constantly using data (ADVANCE, student performance, and behavioral) to determine the best fit for both veteran and new teachers. We consider looping based on teacher-student relationship, licensure, and summative performance data. We believe in individualized professional development plans that are designed to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administrators to review their goals and monitor progress and development. Each teacher will submit 1 professional and 1 personal goal in October, which will support teachers toward highly-effective practice. The Danielson’s Framework for Teacher Effectiveness (2007) will be used to track areas of need and progress. Teachers self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders. All professional development is research and evidence based. Research Based Strategies (RBIs) are emphasized in our trainings. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our network specialists support teacher retention by providing on-site job-embedded trainings, modeling, and teacher team development . We are committed to developing a culture for learning and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  celebrating the success of our teachers. To this end, we encourage team events, opportunities for external learning, and highlighting exemplary work. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional learning plan is guided by the NYC Chancellor’s Handbook for Professional Learning and provides for whole school and individual teacher support (August - June, ongoing). Although much of the training is differentiated to meet the specific needs of individual teachers, all staff members will receive training and support in implementing and preparing teachers around the use of data to inform instruction and understand the progress of all learners/subgroups. September- roll out of systematic analysis of data collection, monitoring, and teacher conferencing January- check in for progress evaluation June- assessment, reflection and next steps. October - June – teacher feedback sessions (from peers and supervisors), Looking at Student Work protocol implementation, Opportunities for differentiated professional development for staff members using the weekly allocated time as well as structured periods and events. PD is differentiated based on content area and PD for new teachers may vary from those provided to more veteran teachers. Prepare teaching staff in the Common Core standards (on-going through lesson plan support, common planning, feedback, professional development). Formal and informal cycles of observations will be conducted by school leaders using feedback and tracking progress September through June. • Identification of point personnel, lead teachers, to support colleagues • Principal and Assistant Principals provide workshops and teacher conferencing. Key personnel and other resources will include leadership, network support instructional leads and external consultants. • Frequent cycles of informal and formal observation Teacher mid-year, end-year evaluations and self-evaluation Para-professional Professional Development: Paraprofessionals also attend school-wide professional development opportunities during Chancellor PD days. Professional Development for School Leaders: Principals and AP's attend conferences provided by the district. School leaders also attend professional development provided by CSA and ELI. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the MOSL team have worked collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures. Professional development had been provided to the entire staff around the use of data and assessment results, including frequent formative assessments to improve instruction. We also hold an extended cabinet meeting, and ILT meetings (Instructional Leadership Team) which consists of teachers and administrators, in order to examine data, and ultimately implement research based strategies and instructional practices to improve instruction school wide. The ILT meets at least twice per month. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $147,691 X 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $19,097 $50,188 0 $12,366 $6,230 $2,378,894 X X N/A X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. M.S. 53 Brian Piccolo in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students M.S. 53 Brian Piccolo will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elemwentary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 53, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Brian Piccolo MS 53 in Far Rockaway, NY serves 52 ELLs with a standalone ENL program taught by 1 certified ENL teacher. * Newcomer students have shown achievement gaps in Language arts and Math education evident by their scores in the ELA state exam, Math state exam, NYSITELL, Ready assessment testing scores, as well as, content area teacher evaluation data. ELLs will receive ELA and Math instruction to meet their academic needs. The purpose of the Title III program is to bridge the gap to achieve/approximate grade level proficiency. * The school serves (53) ELLs all of which will be invited to attend Title III instruction. This number is comprised of Entering (4), Emerging (19), Transitioning (14), Expanding (20) and (16) Commanding ELLs . Out of the 37 non commanding ELLs (7) are longterm , (5) are developing and (19) are new commers. Out of that tally (2) are long term ELLs and (6) have IEPs. Out of the (50) ELLs 47 are Hispanic, 1 is Chinese, 1 is Arabic and 1 is Haitian. The program will focus on entering and emerging ELLs. *We have selected the following materials for instruction: Readinga-z, I ready software. Readinga-z: $289.80 I-ready: no title III funds Imagine learning : no title III funds Imagine Math Facts: no title III funds Graphic novel library and book series sets: $386.08 Teaching materials: $210.46 *The majority of the students lack the basic Math skills necessary to attain grade level competency. Instruction will be delivered using manipulatives and web based materials from Imagine Math facts, XL math and Kuta software materials, (free materials.) * The program will be scheduled after school three times a week in sessions from 3:40 pm to 5:00 pm on Wed., Thurs. and Fri. for a total of 73 sessions, (41 sessions covered by Title III and 32 by Title III Immigrant). The program will start on November 1, 2018. (Direct instruction = (1 ENL teacher for 41 sessions + 2 special education teachers for 37 sessions + 1 common branch teacher for 41 sessions) x 1.33 hours per session @ $50.13 per hour =$10,275.82) Additionally, there will be three, 2 hour meetings for the teachers to plan and discuss progress of instruction. (3 teachers x 2 hours x 3 times x $50.17 = $903.06) * The student workshop (a.k.a., Language Learners) sessions are scheduled for: November 2017 1st Week 1,2 2nd Week 7,8,9 3rd Week 14,15,16 5th Week 28,29,30 December 2017 1st Week 5,6,7 2nd Week 12,13,14 3rd Week 19,20 January 2018 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1st Week 3,4 2nd Week 9,10,11 3rd Week 16,17,18 4th Week 23,24,25 5th Week 30,31 February 2018 1st Week 1 2nd Week 6,7,8 3rd Week 13,14,15 5th Week 27,28 March 2018 1st Week 1 2nd Week 6,7,8 3rd Week 13,14,15 4th Week 20,21,22 5th Week 27,28,29 April 2018 1st Week 4,5 2nd Week 10,11,12 4th Week 17 May 2018 1st Week 3 2nd Week 8,9,10 3rd Week 15,16,17 4th Week 22,23,24 5th Week 29,30,31 Meeting PD Dates October 26 -2 hours February 12 - 2 hours June 12 - 2 hours * Students will receive direct instruction from 1 certified ENL teacher, 1 certified Special ED + 1 certified Common Branches teacher. ELA and Math instruction will be administered based on I-Ready Math and ELA scores for each student. I-Ready is an ELA and Math computer-based program that provides individualized instruction and assessment. We will use this data to tailor instruction facilitated by materials from I-Ready and Imagine Learning. *Summary of allocation of funds: Direct instruction = (1 ENL teacher for 41 sessions + 2 special education teachers for 37 sessions + 1 common branch teacher for 41 sessions) x 1.33 hours per session @ $50.13 per hour =$10,275.82 or 83% of total allocation Professional development: 3 teachers x 3 sessions x 2 hours x $50.13 = $903.06 or 7.3% of total allocation Parental engagement: 1 teacher x 3 sessions x 2 hours x $50.13 = $300.78 or 2.5% of total allocation Other pupil services = materials: $768.67 or 6.2% of total allocation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: A certified ENL teacher, certified Science teacher and a certified Common Branches teacher currently employed in MS 53 will meet to discuss students needs and data, instructional methodology, share best practices and design lessons and assessments for the program. There will be 3—2 hour sessions. The PD themes are posted on engage NY as a webinar presentation(Professional Development = (3 teachers x 3 sessions x 2 hours x $47.73 = $859.14)) . Scheduled dates: October 26 -2 hours February 12 - 2 hours June 12 - 2 hours In addition, teachers will attend professional development on web-based programs used by the program (without compensation.)(Webinars).Attendance records and agendas of the PDs will be kept in the ENL compliance Binder in the main office. These are the topics that will be covered in the PDs: PD1: English Language Learners Scaffolds and Supports ENL Teachers and other staff members will overview the ELL population statewide and review the Part 154 proposed regulations. The goal is to also examine the Bilingual Common Core progressions and learn about the different types of scaffolding ELA Curriculum for ELLs. PD2: Supporting SIFE with Low Literacy in the Home Language Teachers will identify the unique instructional needs of SIFE. The goal is to analyze and reflect on the instructional methods that support LL SIFE to read and to learn. Students that require it are scheduled for AIS periods. PD3: Reflecting on student learning outcomes Teachers will categorize evidence of student learning outcomes to identify trends and patterns. Then, teachers identify and plan to implement strategies to support students in mastering intended learning outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parents speak Arabic, Haitian Creole, Chinese with a predominance of Spanish speakers (92%). We communicate with parents in English and their native languages. All invitations and agendas in parents' preferred languages are kept in the ENL compliance folders and copies are posted and distributed in the main office, and in the parent coordinator's room. According to the LAP and the LIP, we have fully implemented the language access kit and resources for our school through the main office. Fliers are posted about the language translation and interpretation unit (contact # and language choices). Moreover, there is staff in our school that speaks Spanish, Haitian Creole and other languages that cooperate when necessary. The parents will be notified about the objectives of the Title III supplemental program via letters in English and native language, phone calls and/or texts. Additionally, there are fliers advertising our Title III sessions (students and parents) posted by the entrance of the school. We will invite parents to 3 workshops offered by a certified ENL teacher -4:00 to 6:00 held on: 11/06/18, 11/27/18, 1/29/19. The topics for parent workshops are: Selecting a Highschool, Helping Students with Homework & Importance of Regular Attendance, What is the NYSESLAT? ENL teachers and content area teachers will be available to speak with parents about their concerns, ideas and student needs. Furthermore, parents of ELL students will be invited to school on NY Care Events and on college-related events such as the visit to Lehman College where students can have the opportunity to take a tour on campus and talk to advisors in reference to obtaining financial aid and classes offered specially designed for Latino students. (This support will be provided without using Title III funds.) Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Brian Piccolo Borough Queens School Number 53 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal ANDREA YARD Coach Instructional: D. Bevilaqqua ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lynda C. McCue/Anna Bongiorno Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent MARY BURTON Assistant Principal G. Williams/Inter.A.Shaw-Willi Coach Lead Collab. Teach. Acad: D. B School Counselor Shanna Pollack/ Eileen Brazier Parent Shatina Maddox Parent Coordinator Saprina Brown Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 229 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94 Total number of ELLs 57 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.89%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1.The formative assessment tools that our school uses to assess the ELL students are: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL Teachers share 2 hours a week of Common Planning, as well as common preparation periods where data from the above mentioned sources listed in III.1 is used to guide instruction and/or provide one-to-one extra help during preps or afterschool. Additionally, ENL Teachers participate in ELA Common Planning with content area teachers in order to share data and provide modifications/scaffolds for ELLs in ELA classroom instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL Teachers share 2 hours a week of Common Planning and share prep periods where data from the: 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Response to Intervention" (RTI): This is a method that works to scientifically match individual students to the teaching practices that are effective for them. Teachers using RT{ will use screening methods to assess your child's proficiency skills and behaviors. If teachers determine that the child needs more support than the traditional instruction provided in a general education classroom, referred to as Tier 1 in RT, they will implement and monitor Tier 1 and Tier 2(double dose of instruction) interventions. Tier 1 interventions(Core instruction) may include small group instruction or additional instructional time. Tier 3(Intensive tailored intervention) interventions are more intensive and may employ materials or programs to target your child's needs. Finally, the teacher will monitor your child's progress to determine if the intervention is working and if not, how it might need to be adjusted to better support your child. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Using the NYSESLAT Modality report across all 3 grade levels the deficiencies in reading and writing modalities are the higher statistical significance rate than the listening and speaking modalities. Therefore the majority ESL intervention programs will focus on the reading and writing modalities: such as ESL reading smart, Reading A-Z and Writing A-Z. According to the data, the majority of our students fall into the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels. Only 2 students out of the 63 are Long Term Ls and we have 4 SIFE students. Our largest instructional groups are the 6 th Grade entering students and the 8 th Commanding . 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NYSESLAT: The ENL teachers prepare a spreadsheet comparing growth from the previous year and meet to discuss lowest modality growth and how they will address those gaps. This is then discussed with administration. ELA and Math scores: are analyzed in teams by department with ENL teachers where they determine weaknesses and by standards. Using the Datawise model the teams prepare an instructional plan to address the weaknesses. In addition, the data is also used to guide Title III after school instruction where we offer Math and ELA support. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in our freestanding ENL programs receive all instruction in English with native language support. The number of ENL instructional units that a student receives is regulated by New York State CR Part 154 regulations and determined by student English-proficiency levels (as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSENLAT scores). The goals of the ENL program are as follows: Provide academic content-area instruction in English o Using ENL methodology and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  instructional strategies. Using native language support to make content comprehensible. Incorporate ENL strategic instruction. Assist students to achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade. Help ELLs meet or exceed the CCLS. In freestanding ENL program, language arts is taught using ENL and ELA methodologies. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies. Native language support is provided. We have implemented a push-in / pull-out model as per CR PART 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have implemented a push-in / pull-out model as per CR PART 154.2. We have 30 push-in periods into ELA where all our ELLs receive 3 hours of ENL integrated instruction and 16 pull-out periods for entering and emerging students separated by grade bands of 6-7 and 7-8 where ELLs receive the additional 3 hours of instruction satisfying the mandated 360 minutes. With this schedule, we are fully compliant (all ELLs are receiving their services as deliniated in CR PART 154.2) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the push-in model teacher differentiates the lesson prepared by the core content teacher by providing supporting documents and scaffolds, as well as re-teaching content as necessary using ENL strategies. The languages used in the content area are English/Native Language using materials that are translated through technology and reference library materials. Every ELL student has a content area glossary for their use. In the pull-out model, all lesson objectives refer to common core standards, as well as ENL standards. Instructional approaches and methods used are scaffolding, cooperative learning, connections to student experiences, targeted vocabulary development, slower speech, differentiated instruction, and few idiomatic expressions for less proficient students, use of visuals and demonstrations, multiple sources of input, and use of adaptive texts and supplementary materials. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All new admits (code 58 ELLs) that are Spanish speaking will be administered the Spanish LAB (assessed and evaluated accordingly). MS 53 has chosen a Math program called GO MATH in which the teachers assign the lessons in their native language and students use laptops and native language workbooks in the classroom. In ELA, Social Studies and Science writing assignments are accepted in their native language and graded by ENL teachers. Each content area teacher has native language books and supplementary teaching materials. ELLs are administered the State Exams that are available in their native language and given all the appropriate mandated accommodations (separate location, no time limits, word to word dictionaries). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Using the latest NYSESLAT test scores by level, the students are grouped by the 5 levels (emerging,entering,transitioning, expanding,commanding), during small group instruction, class projects and reading inventory groups. A. Our instructional plan for SIFE students is: Using Title 3 Allocations, the identified SIFE students will be placed in Literacy and Math after-School , extended day and Saturday programs. In addition to regular school hours the SIFE students will receive Rosetta Stone and Reading ESL Smart for Literacy and use of the Computer Lab for Mathematics. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  B. Our plan for the ELLs in U.S. schools, less than 3 years, (newcomers) is Rosetta Stone and ESL Reading Smart. Modified Language Arts Program with native language intervention support, Tutorial Program, reading and writing reinforcement. C. Our plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years is Computer-based small group tutorial program, using Title 3 funding for After School and/or Saturday Literacy and Math Programs. D. Our plan for long term ELLs (completed 6 years is Rigorous English language instruction though writers' workshops: One of the main instructional focus will be the mastering of the academic vocabulary that is needed for these students to obtain proficiency. E. Our plan for Commanding ELLs within the 2 years of exiting ELL status is to provide support during Push-in schedule and if necessary, access to reference materials, computers and one-to-one help during Lunch periods and after school. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELLs who are also students with disabilities (SWDs) are part of the ESL program. The ESL teacher pulls out from Language Arts/Special Education classes in small groups, in order to reinforce learning strategies, teach advanced vocabulary and increase students’ reading comprehension. Instructional strategies and grade-level materials for the ELA and Content Areas: Lessons will be designed and focus on word recognition, vocabulary knowledge, fluent reading and use of comprehension strategies for each student. Sequential lessons will focus on learning activities that included automatic word recognition, repeated reading of texts, and practice of memory and retrieval strategies, and timed independent practice activities. Adaptations include textbooks in science and social studies, with additional illustrations and highlighted vocabulary. For Math, a curriculum will be designed of a series of lessons that utilizes mathematical vocabulary and math concepts so that students are pulled from their regular classroom according to individual student's academic needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs in the least restricted environment by offering differentiated support. MS 53 offers: Self-contained and integrated instruction where 40% of students in the classroom have IEPs. Additionally, some students may only receive pull-out special education support while attending a mainstream classroom schedule. Moreover, ELL-SWDs receive their mandated ENL minutes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Lessons will be designed and focus on word recognition, vocabulary knowledge, fluent reading and use of comprehension strategies for each student. Sequential lessons will focus on learning activities that include automatic word recognition, repeated reading of texts, practice of memory and retrieval strategies, and timed independent practice activities. For Math, a curriculum will be designed of a series of lessons that utilizes mathematical vocabulary and math concepts so that students can better understand the content. We are targeting students with low writing and reading modality scores per the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the NYSESLAT students new to MS 53 have very low writing scores. Based on ENL teacher prepared assessments most of these students cannot prepare a properly structured sentence in their native language. Based on ENL teacher prepared assessment most new students may be able to add and subtract but have issues with multiplication, division, fractions, etc. As a result, the following programs are being implemented for the upcoming school year: Title 3 Funding: After school Literacy and Math Program, Reading and Writing A-Z, Raz Kids, BrainPOP ESL. These programs will have native language support via bilingual teachers and materials. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  We had a TBE program 2012-2014. MS 53 no longer has nor could replace (after efforts) the personnel to administer the program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Ells are afforded equal access to all school programs; they are eligible to participate in all school-wide programs, such as Computer Lab, and Afternoon school program. In addition, ELL students participate in extracurricular activities such as drama, sports, art, yearbook, and dance. Title III funds are well-used to provide supplemental after school literacy activities. Students work on reading and writing and publish their work. Computer programs such as Microsoft Word are available for after school ELL literacy enhancement. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support the ELLs are: reference library; in English and Spanish, School Library: leveled and content area related books, Bilingual translation for vocabulary, Rosetta Stone books , Reading Success, computer incorporated lessons and the use of I Pads and Mac Computers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The native language support delivered in The Freestanding ENL Program is: use of a bilingual reference library; each student is furnished with a native language content area glossary (Math, Science, Social Studies). The NYS certified ENL teacher is proficient in the native language of Spanish for translation purposes; (ELL Spanish students, as well as, Spanish parents) In addition to ELL Spanish students receive native language support from a certified Spanish teacher. Also, the Ell Haitian Creole , Arabic and Chinese Students receive translated services from staff support members. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All Ell students receive required services, support and resources which correspond to the Ells age and grade level. School provides age-appropriate, high interest, low-level reading materials. Students consult bilingual glossaries and other reference materials to assist them gain access to grade-level curricula. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share a building with 2 schools. Our schools are segregated and students are not allowed to commingle. However, the ENL teachers confer and support each other as needed. For example, clarification on compliance, testing and teaching strategies, materials, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Brian Piccolo offers a summer program open to the ELLs called Practice Makes Perfect that offers Math instruction to bridge gaps and strengthen math skills and fluency. During the year new students are eased into the school during registration where an ENL teacher will meet with the parents to learn about their family situation and any issues that may be lingering. The process usually takes about 2 hours while the parent registers the student the ENL teacher engages the student and tries to ease any anxiety with a quick tour or meeting a classmate if deemed necessary. This creates a bond between the student, parent and ENL teacher before the student attends classes. The students know that the ENL team offers a safe harbor while they acclimate to the new environment. We also have a bilingual guidance counselor to support our ELLs in need of help. Furthermore, the Title III program is in place to help bridge any gaps in education and all students are encouraged to join our varied after school activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not available. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All teachers of ELLs at MS53 will receive the Teaching English language learners Strategies that Work by Katherine Davies Samway and Dorothy Taylor. The teacher of Ells also receives ELL support from the ENL staff on an individual basis (weekly). The ELL support staff will train the content area teachers in theories, practices and strategies that work with the Ell student based on each Ell students individual needs in that content area. In addition, the ELA teacher would have daily contact the ELL staff member. 2. The ELL support staff provides important student background information and testing accommodations. ELL staff communicates with colleagues regarding ‘Common Core Standards’ tasks. For example, eighth graders learn related tasks that will be extended in High School. This will aid in the transition process. The testing coordinator ensures that 6th, 7th, and 8th graders receive all mandated accommodations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3.The support that is being provided to staff to assist ELLs as they transition to middle school would be the scaffolding , utilization of visual activities, allow the ELLs to work with native speakers, establish language routines, not over correcting the ELLs and incorporation of small group instruction. 4. MS53 is planning Professional Development in collaboration with the P school committee, Center for Educational Innovation for new teachers of ELLs in ENL/Content Areas, Language Acquisition, co-teaching with ELLs to satisfy this requirement. The content area teachers of ELLs will have ongoing ENL staff development and hands on training on a weekly basis. Additionally, on a need basis, the ENL teacher will be available. Weekly log will be kept for all teachers of ELLs in the content area. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100  Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator encourages all parents to take an interest in their child’s education. All parents are invited to a new student orientation one week before school starts. There are two Parent/Teacher Conferences during the year, as well as parents are always welcome to come to the school to speak with their child’s teachers and guidance counselor. Appointments are also scheduled between all ELL specialist, content area teachers and ELL parents on a weekly basis to discuss, analyze and evaluate the academic and social needs of the individual ELL students. All written and verbal communication between the school administrations is done through the ELL parent language of preference. ex: Native language or English Language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 101 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Andrea Majied, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 102  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 53 School DBN: 27053 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Andrea Yard Title Principal Williams/Shaw-Williams Assistant Principal Saprina Brown Parent Coordinator McCue/Bongiorno ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shatina Maddox Parent Bevilaqua Bevilaqua Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Brazier/Pollack School Counselor Mary Burton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/13/15 10/13/15 10/13/15 10/13/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/13/15 1/1/01 10/13/15 10/13/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 103  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q053 School Name: Brian Piccolo Superintendent: M.Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lynda McCue ENL teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language identification is done by either: • A DOE staff person and /or a licensed pedagogue identifying the language after conducting an interview with the parents to complete the Home Language Indentification Survey. Pedagogues can also extract information about the language preferences through the ATS RHLA screen and the emergency blue cards kept in the main office. • The limited English proficient parent identifying their language from a Language Identification Card that is posted in a visible area in the main office and in the Parent Coordinator's office. • The outsider vendor identifying the language with the use of specialized linguists over the phone 2018-19 RSCEP-R 104  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Chinese Russian Haitian Creole Hindi Mossi TWI 223 74 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 73.84% 24.5% .33% .33% 0 .66% 0 0 .33% 220 74 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 72.85% 24.5% .33% .33% .33% .66% .33% .33% .33% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families N/A All our yearly docs have been translated Through out the year translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Most of our forms have been translated by google and checked by bilingual 2018-19 RSCEP-R 105  staff for accuracy. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Curriculum night 9/20/18 Student led conferences 11/28-29/18 3/26-27/19 5/16/19 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have bilingual staff and volunteers that translate for the parents. We are procuring equipment for translation purposes to be more efficient, as well as the support of our bilingual staff and volunteers. For classroom support teacher who needed will be using the telephone translation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 106  Our automatic call system translates messages according to the home language in ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. There will be Professional Development lectures delivered by the LAC, as well as detailed e-mailed instructions so the staff members have access at their fingertips. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school's Language Access Coordinator (LAC) is responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and responsibilities which include their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. In addition, our LTI team will post at the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our school's safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices due to language barriers. Moreover, our team will ensure that if more than a 10% of children speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, must obtain from the Language Translation and Interpretation unit translation services. Lastly, the LTI team provides information through the Department's website in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of the parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The LAC must ensure the quality of our language services and convey how critical it is to communicating effectively with our LEP parents. Therefore, to ensure the successful implementation of its language access initiatives the following are performed: • Principal Satisfaction Survey – Survey distributed to all school principals to assess the central supports provided to schools, including the provision of language services by the T & I Unit and external language service providers. • T & I Customer Satisfaction Survey – Survey distributed to all T & I customers to assess provision of language services by the T & I Unit. • School Survey for Parents – Survey made available to all school-aged parents to assess their child’s school, including whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 107  • Monitoring of Multilingual Welcome Poster – Site visits to determine if schools have the required multilingual welcome poster visibly posted at the entrance of the facility. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 108 
