2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q059 School Name: I.S. 059 SPRINGFIELD GARDENS Principal: KIMLYN GREIG 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information SPRINGFIELD GARDENS I.S. 59 29Q059 342900010059 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 132-55 RIDGEDALE STREET, SPRINGFIELD GARDENS, NY 11413 718-527-3501 718-276-1364 Phone Number: KimlynGreig Fax: kgreig@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: KimlynGreig Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Carol Briggs-McDougan Angela Bethune JACQUELINE THOMPSON SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mr. Ian Odom N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 191-02 90th Avenue, Jamaica, NY 11423 Superintendent’s Office Address: bmitche2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 Phone Number: 718-712-1598 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  QUEENS SOUTH/ D29 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MARLENE WILKS Executive Director: 82-01 ROCKAWAY BOULEVARD, QUEENS, NY 11416 MWILKS@SCHOOLS.NYC .GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name KimlynGreig Carol Briggs-McDougan Angela Bethune Troy Williams Ian Odom N/A N/A CarlottaCuenca Jacqueline Thompson TamikaNater Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosanne Patterson Wendell Ulerie Andrea McGowan JeanelleOdom Sarah Howard JermaineMcCalpin N/A N/A N/A N/A Member Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? "If a man can write a book, or preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbor, though he build his house in the woods, the world would make a beaten path to his door." Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., adapted from Ralph Waldo Emerson. "We're not interested in saving a hundred kids, we want to talk about how you save kids by the tens of thousands, because that's how we're losing them." Geoffrey Canada Vision: Students at Intermediate School 59 are literate and well-informed problem solvers. They use their natural talents, gifts, and abilities as springboards to high levels of academic achievement. Our students are confident,and are able to express their thinking and reasoning in a variety of ways. They are self-motivated learners capable of making strategic choices that will impact themselves, their families, communities, as well as present and future generations. To support the whole child, we develop trusting and respectful relationships with our families and the broader community that help us nurture our students' social and emotional growth. All our scholars leave IS 59 with a balance of academic and interpersonal skills they will need to carve out their own place in the world. Mission: Teachers at IS 59 will collaborate to provide access to engaging and challenging curricula that acknowledge students' strengths, culture, and promote 21 st. century skills. When planning for the needs of all students, our teachers will promote choice and students voice that will build student agency. Our scholars will demonstrate complex thinking and reasoning through rich discussions and writing for a wide variety of purposes in preparation for the demands of college, careers, and real world challenges. With the help of parents, community members, elected officials and a variety of CBOs, we will work together to provide a safe and supportive environment that will nurture our students' successes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Intermediate School 59Q is located in the Springfield Gardens, Southeast Queens section of New York City. I.S. 59Q is a Middle School in District 29 Queens, made up of students ranging from grades 6 – 8. Our current student body consists of 561 students; approximately 446 General Education, and 115 Special Needs students, and the Rising Star Academy. The student body is relatively homogeneous with 96% African/Caribbean American students, and approximately 3-4% Hispanic. We are a uniformed school. Our students display a variety of artistic abilities. Among them are-writing, oratory, drawing, arts and craft, painting, basketball, singing etc. Our students are generally kind, helpful and collaborative. They have begun develop discussion skills as part of the center of their learning. The community is comprised of working middle class families with single-family homes. The Caribbean culture dominates the student/parent body, however the school embraces and celebrates all represented cultures. The learning community in I.S. 59Q is focused on improving the performance outcomes of our general education and special needs populations in all subjects areas, especially on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessments. Our goal is to meet AYP by achieving our EAMO but exceeding our safe harbor target in both content areas. I.S. 59 recognizes that in order to meet the diverse needs of our students and families, we must reach out to community groups and build partnerships with them. Several partnerships have become embedded into the school program for our students. The following is a list of collaborations we have established at 59Q: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  • NorthWell/Long Island Jewish Health System • Girls on the Run Empowerment Initiative • YMCA – After School Program • Legal Outreach • NY Foundling – onsite, working with at risk students. I.S. 59Q, “Where Scholars SOAR” is our motto. We believe that collaboration among teachers, parents, and community based organizations will meet the needs of the total student academically, physically, socially and emotionally. Developing young adults as responsible community members and citizens is also a priority. In the last three years, I.S. 59Q students and teachers have raised over $2,000 for various charities and causes. As an extension to our curriculum, our students grapple with real world issues and seek collaboration with our school community, homes, and the broader community to work on solving them. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We service scholars with IEPs and ENLs. The needs of our IEP scholars vary where instruction and management needs are specifically and specially designed around the their IEPs. The needs of the ENLs are to provide instruction in the English language while allowing them opportunity to refer to their language and culture as scaffolds. These student populations struggle with proficiency in the key areas of literacy and math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Supportive Environment: Most progress was made in the area of "Supportive Environment". Our teachers attended Restorative and Brain Power Workshops. They have begun to transfer this information to other staff. This will support our new Yearlong Social Emotional Learning Plan as well as our Yearlong Parent Engagement Plan. Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teams: Overall, our 2018 Instructional Report Analysis in math implicated a lack of conceptual understandings, and in ELA, challenges in RI standards, particularly Standard RI 1. Instructional Focus 2018-2019: In all content areas, teachers will plan lessons with a focus on the creation of rich tasks and activities that are aligned to learning targets with teachers and students conducting ongoing checks for understanding, resulting in deeper evaluation of student learning and understanding of content. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q059 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 586 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 73 73 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 36 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 69.8% % Reduced Lunch 2.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 4.3% 5.6% 1.4% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.21 3% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 44 92.6% 4.8% 19.3% 86.5% 1.9% 4.6% 4 38% 3.5 14.7% 24% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2018-2019 school year, the instructional focus was around student discussion. As a result, the scholars are respectful to each other during their classes which leads to the ability to share ideas and learn from each other allowing the facilitator to develop rich conversations in classes around challenging standards. Scholars now know the routines of discussion. Math: Based on the analysis of the June Instructional Reports, scholars continue to be challenged with the transference and retention of math skills from one topic to another. This implies a greater need for student conceptual understandings. ELA: In ELA, students struggled mostly with informational standards. 85% of our students earning 75% of possible points and above were in our Rising Stars classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with guidance and support from administration, all teachers will plan and execute lessons with a focus on the creation of rich tasks and activities aligned to learning targets, with teachers and students conducting checks for understanding, resulting in an 8 % increase in student performance among students in the lowest third, on common assessment as measured by end-of-unit ELA and Go Math common assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher teams will unpack Code X and Go Math units and end of unit tasks to revise the end of-unit tasks for alignment to the Standards and grade-appropriate rigor. Students in the lowest third September, 2018 – June, 2019 Teacher Teams Assistant Principals Principal FSC Staff  Teachers will plan how skills and conceptual understandings embedded in power standards and learning targets will be taught, so every student may gain access to content.  Math teachers will use the Task Analysis Guide (MTAG) and a Student Conversation Rubric to measure the quality of math task.  Teachers will lead students in conduct whole class interactive problem solving.  ELA, SS and Science teachers will engage students in a variety of texts (informational, literary, artifacts, and other real-world texts) to promote student knowledge, critical thinking, and writing for a variety of purposes to build student knowledge and skill.  Across all subject areas, students will conduct rich discussions.  Across all subject areas, students will write for a variety of purposes.  Teachers will receive ongoing professional development on quality lesson planning and delivery of content with a focus on the creation of rich tasks. Students in the lowest third September, 2018 – June, 2019 Teacher Teams Administration  Teachers will receive professional development in creating quality questions that serve for discussion versus questions that serve as checks for understanding.  Teachers will receive professional development in assessing students' thinking that has been made visible in student discussion, writing, models, and performance/projects. In math teachers will receive professional development on conducting whole class interactive problem solving.   Teachers will receive professional development regarding looking at student data along with research-based high leverage strategies that teach concepts. FSC Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Parent Coordinator and school staff will conduct workshops for parents regarding how they may support their children in attaining the habits of lifelong readers and writers as well as fluency in mathematics. Students in the lowest third September, 2018 – June, 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Administration FSC Staff Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and point teacher will attend FSC parent workshops. We will conduct workshops for parents in the areas of Math, ELA, and Social Emotional Learning. The workshops will be organized by the parent coordinator, guidance counselor and teachers in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time will be allotted for in the school's schedule for teachers to meet and plan. Additional resources for purchase will include professional books, educational articles, student vocabulary development books, videos etc. Per session will be paid to teachers who provide workshops for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 4% increase in student achievement among students in the lowest third, on math and ELA end-of-unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Go Math and ELA End-of-Unit Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: Progress was made in the area of "Supportive Environment". Our teachers attended Restorative and Brain Power Workshops. They have begun to transfer this information to other staff. This will support our new Social Emotional Learning Program of choice (Wediko). Needs: Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, only 38% of our students felt supported by our staff when they needed emotional support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  By June 2019 there will be a 40% increase in student access to social emotional supports through the implementation and fostering of SEL strategies, as measured by The School Quality Snapshot. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration will meet with all constituents (individually and collectively) to create alignment among the school's Yearlong Instructional Plan, its SEL Yearlong Plan and its Yearlong Parent Engagement Plan.  The school's Climate and Culture Committee will meet weekly to conduct articulation and ongoing SEL support.  Climate and Culture Committee will facilitate Student Government election.  Climate and Culture Committee will work to implement level 1 interventions and PBIS.  A Student Government body will be formed. Students in Special Education and Students identified by Grade teams as having behavior challenges September, 2018 – December, 2018 September, 2018 – June, 2019 Students in Special Education and students identified by grade teams as having behavioral challenges.  The school has selected Wediko as its SEL vendor. In addition, a selected group of teachers have been certified in Restorative Practices and Brain power. This training will be turnkeyed to the entire staff.  Teachers on each grade will "adopt students" to ensure that each student is known well by an adult in the building. They will develop behavior plans with the guidance counselor, PC, and administrator  Parent coordinator, teachers, guidance will communicate  results to parents during Tuesday PE time or otherwise. FS Staff will facilitate LSCI techniques as well as other de-escalation techniques to all staff.  New York Foundling will facilitate de-escalation strategies  for staff. Students government representatives will participate in school decision-making. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Guidance Counselor, Dean, FSC Staff, Parent Coordinator, YMCA Director, PTA President School Safety, Teacher Students Student Government Administration Teachers Guidance Counselor FSC Staff Wediko Staff Climate and Culture Committee Social emotional practices will be shared with parents at parent workshops. Students in Special Education and students November 2018 – May, 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA President 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement identified by grade teams as having behavioral challenges. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At the monthly PTA meetings, in addition to academic support, teachers will share the implementation the school's level 1 social emotional development supports with parents, and invite them to attend/participate in assemblies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have been allotted dollars to purchase Weidko. Grade teams will meet on Tuesdays after parent engagement to discuss students' social emotional needs and discuss how they may help students grow in this area so as to meet their academic goals. The guidance counselor and/or parent coordinator will attend these meetings to have input and conduct communication with parents. Tuesday parent engagement time will be used to conduct articulation with parents and students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students and parents will respond to a school- created Survey based on the NYC school survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, select teachers attended FSC Professional learning sessions in the content areas of Math and ELA. The Assistant Principal attended a School Leader Plus 1 FSC Initiative. Need: There is a need for a common understanding regarding the work of teacher teams. Teachers across grades have varied understandings regarding the role of curriculum, an approach to unit planning, the work of teacher teams and the use of assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will meet to evaluate student data on end-of unit tasks, and incorporate research-based high leverage strategies that will provide all students access to content, resulting in an 8% increase in student performance on end of unit Math and ELA assessments as measured by GO Math and ELA End of Unit Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administrative Cabinet meetings (Principal and APs) will take place every week to reflect and support teaching and learning. Students in the lowest third  The Instructional Cabinet will meet every 4-5 weeks to analyze end-of-unit data to share with horizontal teams. Teachers who attend outside Pl will turnkey at these meeting so all content area teachers may adopt the best practices presented.  Horizontal Teams will meet weekly, during common planning time and select Mondays, to analyze student data and revise units and lessons.  Grade teams will conduct articulation regarding student SEL/Behavior growth. October 2018 - December 2018 Teachers Teams Administration  Administration will conduct professional development regarding the work of teacher teams, the inquiry cycle, and protocols (The Power Of Teacher Teams, Datawise, and Driven By Data will be among professional readings).  Administration will conduct PL regarding effective Unit and Students in the lowest third October 2018 to June 2019 Content Leaders Data Specialists Administration Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Lesson Planning.  Administration will provide actionable and timely feedback to teacher teams.  Teachers will conduct learning walks and teacher rounds with feedback and next steps.  Vertical teams will meet to analyze interim assessment, discuss trends across grades, and instructional implications.  Grade teams will meet weekly on Tuesdays to discuss students' social emotional growth and develop plans to help them.  At the end of each "bend" or group of lessons, teachers will record student performance on related skills to be promptly addressed during Tier 1 intervention, AIS etc. as opposed to the end of each unit.  Max Scholar, Rewards and iReady will be used for address Tiers 2 and 3 intervention. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  After school AIS to target students scoring levels 2 and on the cusp of proficiency  Teachers will communicate the instructional program and any follow-up to parents via Teacher Ease.  Parent Coordinator will follow-up with newsletter etc.  Teachers will facilitate parents during parent engagement time on Tuesdays. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students in the lowest third October 2018 – June, 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator, who is part of the Instructional cabinet, will continue to align Parent Workshops and activities to the school's Instructional Plan, its SEL Plan and the Parent Engagement Plan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher rounds will be implemented. During this time, we will use per diem funds to cover teachers engaged in the process of visiting classroom to participate in collaborative teaching and provide effective feedback to their peers. Horizontal Teams will meet during time allotted in the schedule as well as Mondays to conduct unit and lesson planning. Vertical teams will meet after interim assessments to assess students growth across grades. In May/June, per session will be paid for unit/lesson revision for the 2019-2020 school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 25% of teachers will receive at least "Developing" in Danielson's Components 1e and 3c, and there will be a 4% increase in student performance among the lowest third on end-of-unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson's Rubric for Teacher Evaluation and Development and Go Math and ELA End of Unit Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. x 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016 survey the leadership is supportive and collaborative in all areas with the facilitators with a need to focus on parent participation in shared decision making. Needs: The priority this school year will be to create alignment among the school's Instructional Goals, its SEL Goals, and the goals for parent Engagement so as to increase a climate of collaboration and high expectations. : . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  By June 2019, all IS 59 constituents will strategically incorporate the school's vision, mission, goals and what the school believes about how students learn best into their support of students and families, resulting in a 10% increase in favorable responses on End-of-Year Surveys, as measured by End-of-Year Surveys. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The school leader will engage all constituents in developing a clear understanding and common language regarding the school's vision, mission, instructional focus and CEP goals for the year. School leader will refine/implement safety and instructional systems and structures.  Students Teachers Parents September 2018 - May 2019 Administration Teachers PC  The school leader will work with the assistant principals and Community Guidance Counselor district and FSC Advance support in norming the administrative team's evaluative lenses and aligning support of teaching and learning to data, instructional focus and the needs of students and teachers  The school leader will work to strengthen parent engagement. CBOs Climate and Culture Committee  Teachers will lead vision and mission activities during home Students room.  The school leader will help monitor and support teacher Teachers teams in conducting October 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teachers,  The school leader will host weekly Climate and Culture Parents PC meetings to support and monitor school climate and related activities. Community Guidance Counselor  Principal will invite community liaisons such as fire fighters, police officers, politicians and other community advocates to participate in assemblies and other school activities.  The school leader will monitor resources in an ongoing  fashion to ensure alignment to school's instructional focus and goals. School leader will attend SLT, PTA, CEC and other meeting/workshops to support and be supported in meeting the school's goals. All Other Staff PTA CBOs  Weekly administrative Cabinet meetings to support AP growth.  The school leader will attend LEAP sessions. Assistant Principals October 2018 - May 2019 LEAP Administrator Principal Assistant Principals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30   The school leader will work with the LEAP Administrator to support her goals. FSC Advance Staff District Advance Staff LEAP Administrator  The school leader will work with the parent coordinator and Principal SLT to plan "chat and chews" to deepen parents' understanding of the school's instructional and SEL goals. August 2018 to June 2019 Principal SLT Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will collaborate with all constituents to inform and support parents in the academic, and social emotional development of their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator and select teacher will attend FSC Parent Coordinator Workshops for which per diem funds will be needed. Teachers will be paid per session to provide workshops for parents. Time will be allotted for administration to analyze Advance results and plan strategic supports for teachers. Administrative cabinet meeting will occur weekly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of teachers, parents, and students will be able to explain the mission, instructional focus and goals of IS 59. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-designed surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016 survey we did show a 5% increase in the element of strong family ties. Needs: To increase parental involvement in the school's academic goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, stronger family/community ties will be evidenced by a 25% increase in active family/community participation in events facilitated by teachers, the parent coordinator, the guidance counselor, CBOs and other constituents as measured by family/community feedback and attendance sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Administration will work with the SLT and all other Parents constituents to ensure strong communication among school, home and community.  Administration will work with PC and guidance counselor to promote the Annual Town Hall Meeting, inviting parents and community partners to review the school's vision, mission, goals and what the school believes about how its students learn best, as well as the community's role in the school's vision. Students will work with community to participate in community building activities.  Community Partners Students 2018-2019 School Year Administration Parent Coordinator SLT Community Partners  YMCA will promote community building activities.  Parent coordinator will communicate with parents in a timely manner (Newsletters etc).  Teachers will ensure timely posting of curriculum requirements etc. on Teacher Ease.  CASONY will facilitate a Family STEM Night.  Climate and Culture Committee will facilitate assemblies etc. and invite parents.  Parent coordinator will organize a health fair, dental van facility, vision screening, and flu shots.  Community members such as firemen and policemen will be invited to become a part of school safety team. Students Parents 2018-2019 School Year Teachers Community YMCA Staff CASONY Staff  Teachers will conduct parent workshops that focus on SEL Parents strategies that are utilized by staff.  The guidance counselor will enlist the assistance of community partners at Student Town Hall Meeting. 2018-2019 School Year Child Health Center Scholars Teachers  At least two family events will be held on Saturdays to Community Guidance Counselor accommodate working schedules. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CDEC, YMCA, CHAMPS, CASONY, local politicians. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will utilize the Focus funding that was allocated to attract parents to become more involved to help build academic success in each scholar. We will allot time on Saturdays and evenings, and pay per session to staff to accommodate working parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 10% increase of parent attendance at school events, as measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Sheets; Feedback Forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) At the end of each bend/arc of learning, teachers will collect student performance on skills that are embedded in standards to plan AISservices. At the end of each bend/arc of learning, teachers will collect student performance on skills that are embedded in standards to plan AISservices. At the end of each bend/arc of learning, teachers will collect student performance on skills that are embedded in standards to be plan Tier 1 intervention Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Write ON! NY Ready i-Ready After School Intervention Services. Tier 1 intervention services from teacher Push-in AISsupport. i-Ready After SchoolIntervention Services. SmartScience Small group based on need. During instruction time and AISPeriods. Individual Small Group Intervention. During instruction time and AISPeriods. Individual Small Group Intervention. During instruction time. Urban Advantage 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) services to plan AISsupport. At the end of each bend/arc of learning, teachers will collect student performance on skills that are embedded in standards to plan Tier 1 intervention services and AISsupport. Students not responding to Tiers 1 and 2 intervention services. Students who have been evaluated by school psychologist. Tier 1 intervention by teacher. Small Group Intervention. During instruction time. Individual Scheduled Times. IEPand Behavioral plans will be designed for individual students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Providing book bags, uniforms and any other instructional materials they will need. Restorative circles sessions with the guidance counselor. Include these students in the trip to Albany on Lobby Day to promote the power of their voices. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. I.S. 59 will continue its commitment to teacher development continuing our weekly common planning, by providing our staff with needs-based professional development, by building staff capacity through peer coaching model and inter-visitations. I.S. 59 will continue to support staff in meeting their certification requirements – professional development hours, coursework and external professional development. I.S. 59 will ensure that all teachers have access and opportunity to attend in-house and external professional development in order to further their content knowledge and pedagogy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administration will continue to align time and the budget so as to provide all staff with high quality professional development. Monday professional development will be around the school's instructional focus, and teacher observation trends. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Team Meetings are held every Monday where teachers discuss student progress in order to properly assess student learning. There are a certain team of teachers that meet, inter-disciplinary, every other Tuesday to discuss student progress and how the school can implement progress for all students across disciplines. The Team of teachers will attend content area professional development organized by the FSC that will implement and train the teachers on the effective use of common summative and formative assessment to look at data and trends in student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 210,164.00 16,979 66,253 0 0 2,488 2,998,158.00 X X X n/a n/a x X 4a 4a 4a n/a n/a n/a 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S 59 Springfield Gardens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I.S. 59 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name I.S. 59 Borough Queens School Number 59 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carleton Gordon Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ra'ven Pritchard Teacher/Subject Area Takira Alexander Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Tamika Nater Coach type here School Counselor Shaniqua White Parent Christine Kelevh Parent Coordinator Sheryl Leverett Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 589 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are assessed utilizing the NYS ELL Baseline Assessment and then a deeper analysis is conducted utilizing the EDAT. These assessments inform instruction by providing accurate information on the students English Language Acquisition as well as grade level proficiency. In addition, the ESL instructor uses the DRA to understand students ability of Rhyming, alliteration, phonemic awareness Letter naming, word-list reading, spelling, decoding, analogies, structural analysis, and syllabication. Also student's reading fluency, as well as contextual reading, vocabulary, comprehension, and reading engagement skills are also measured in the test. The results of these assessments provides data for the ESL teacher to determine the priorities in her 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  instructional practice, and how to effectively drive her instruction for optimal student achievement. Based on the assessment results the ESL instructor provides levels corresponding to the DRA levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Within 10 days of registration parents are informed of the date to attend a parent orientation session. The orientation session is presented by the ESL teacher and the Parent Coordinator. At the orientation parents learn about the program choices offered to eligible students (Transitional Bilingual Education: TBE; Freestanding ESL, and/or Dual Language). The ELL Parent Information Case (EPIC) toolkit is used to help parents understand the process, choices and programs offered to their students. A brochure is given to parents at the orientation and they listen and watch a DVD showing programs offered. All materials are available in the nine major languages in our system. Any parent needing another language for this orientation process will be given a translator from the school or Translation Unit, to ensure complete understanding of the programs and choices. After viewing the DVD parents are given a Parent Survey and Program Selection form to choose the program they want their child to participate in. Parents fill out the forms on site, or if time is needed, they are asked to return the forms within one week (either with their child or through the US postal service). Parents are notified if the forms are not returned within the time frame given. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Several summative assessments are given during the school year in efforts to assess students baseline, progress, and area of need. Students are initially assessed using the ELL periodic assessment. During the school year students are given Progress Checks that demonstrates the progress that each student has individually made. Students are given ELL Periodic Assessments for all quarter assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, it is necessary for interventions to be addressed. The ELL teacher will coordinate a meeting with the AIS/Rti team to discuss the data that the ELL teacher/Coordinator has created. A plan will be created for each individual student to support the necessary interventions. Summative data allows for a closer analysis of need areas, we use that data to guide tailored intervention constructed by the ELL teacher with support from school administration. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All outcome assessments used school-wide are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. Using RLAT along with the EDAT provides all data necessary to create and implement a successful ELL program. RLAT data provides scores for the NYSESLAT, and the EDAT gives scale scores for the NYSESLAT as well as other testing data. This data is then used to inform grouping, clustering, necessary program hours, push-in support/pull-out support, and curriculum planning. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings the ELL teacher/Coordinator is provided an opportunity to turn-key the information at in school professional developments. The ELL teacher/Coordinator also meets with cluster area teachers to disseminate the findings. Once the information and findings are disseminated, action plans are created to adjust the programs. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students participate in a free standing English as a Second Language (ESL) pull-out program with services provided by a licensed ESL teacher. All students receive rigorous instruction in English Language skills as well as in the content areas of mathematics, social studies and science as mandated by the CR Part 154 and the Language Allocation Policy. Instruction is aligned with ESL and Native Language Arts (NLA) standards, the core curriculum, and CCLS. It is also data driven and customized to meet the needs of all ELLs. The workshop model of instruction is used to deliver high quality, differentiated instruction for our ELLs. The ESL Program also utilizes software, such as MySciLearn, DuoLingo, IReady and Skoolbo, as well as CD's with pre-recorded text, web-sites for ESL students, computer quizzes and graphic organizers. Students build a foundation of academic language which is enhanced by constant exposure to both new and familiar vocabulary. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated instructional minutes are met because the ESL instructor provides the 8 ELL students with pull out instruction first and second period daily. In addition, the ESL instructor provides push-in services for the rest of the day. Students are placed in small flexible groups for targeted instruction based on student needs. They are grouped according to proficiency levels as follows: Emerging/entering (4 students); transitioning (1 student); and Expanding (3), students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction per week. Instruction is exclusively given in English and is differentiated based on ability and interests. However, students with the same native language are grouped together daily to support each other in small-group instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English through the use of ESL methodology. Teachers integrate modeling, bridging, and contextualization techniques to scaffold instruction for ELL students, utilizing reliable technology translators when necessary. Explicit vocabulary instruction supports language acquisition. Graphic organizers and visuals are used as a tool to develop students’ writing skills. To accelerate academic achievement we target language development across the grades and content areas, with great emphasis on active engagement via interactive experiences. Teachers meet weekly to review students’ progress and plan instruction. Specifically, the ESL teacher and content area teachers meet regularly to ensure curriculum alignment. The administration provides for common planning sessions to insure that: 1) Teachers provide students with opportunities to be involved in purposeful conversations; 2). All language modalities are incorporated into the lesson - for example group discussions, journals etc.; 3). There is ongoing collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to create a learning community knowledgeable about the linguistic needs of ELL students; 4).The literacy coach works closely with teachers to support rigorous instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All ELL students, regardless of proficiency levels, are required to take all content area citywide and state exams. Students for whom native language translations are available can take content area exams in their native language. Through common planning, updates are provided by the ESL teacher to provide up-to-date support for all ESL students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status . To support Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), I.S. 59 will administer a variety of tests in order to accurately determine students’ strengths and weaknesses. This will guide instruction and the delivery of Academic Intervention Services (AIS). We will provide small group instruction that focuses on language acquisition, sight words, and vocabulary development to help students become beginning readers, they will use individualized computer programs to develop listening comprehension and basic reading skills. They will also receive additional services in language acquisition via tutoring in our extended day and after- school program. Counseling services will be an integral part of this skills building program. b.Newcomers, students with less than three years in the US, constitute a small portion of our classes at I.S. 59. When a new student is registered, we provide an informal student orientation, and a buddy system that will assist the student during the day. Newcomers receive intensive instruction in basic language skills such as pronunciation, phonics, phonemic awareness and vocabulary development. The students are in the classroom with their English-speaking peers and conversation is encouraged between all students to enhance English language acquisition. Additionally they receive differentiated instruction from the ESL teacher and classroom teachers who have been provided with professional development in "best practices" for ELLS. c. The students receiving ESL services from 4 to 6 years perform well in listening and speaking, while reading and writing represent a challenge. Thus, they are assigned individualized supplemental work so they can have additional at-home practice to accelerate their progress. Further, based on data from the NYSESLAT and comparison of previous year levels on this test, we focus on areas of weakness and service these students in our after school program to enhance language acquisition. To build their reading fluency, they read books on their proficiency level and use the library books to read at home. To enhance their writing skills, the ESL teacher models the writing process and uses graphic organizers to assist students in sequencing and organizing their writing projects. d. Our plan for long term ELL students will include targeting higher order thinking skills such as inference and analytical skills. In addition, our long term ELL students will read specially designed ESL books and the development of the four language skills - listening, speaking, reading, and writing – will be emphasized. Long term ELL students will also attend the After-school Enrichment Program which focuses on reading comprehension, shared reading, writing activities, as well as mathematics. Through day, extended day and after school academicintervention programs, long term ELL students will participate in a broad range of activities that promote literacy and mathematic skills. in addition to what we do for new-comers and developing ELLS, we implement and utilize a comprehensive literature and language arts program for our Long-term ELLs (LTEs). This academic intervention will be utilized in addition to our regular curriculum for our (LTEs) who are at a plateau in their English language development and need the additional support with the academic language and literacy skills to tackle challenging fiction and nonfiction. We will utilize an abundance of resources to effectively support our students. We will be strategic in utilizing supports that let students interact authentically with text, as they mark the text up with their notes, thoughts, opinions and reactions to the readings. In addition, we will provide students with a model of fluency through our interactive software and ensure that all students have access to the materials arranged by grade level. Lastly, we plan to weave this intervention into our established programs for our ELLs (i.e., push-in ESL teacher, team teaching literacy blocks) by carefully considering which portions of the students’ academic needs require strengthening, in conjunction with mandating our LTEs to participate in our Afterschool/Saturday program provided. e. Since all students are expected to meet all performance standards and benchmarks, our instructional program offers all students, including our special needs students, day, extended day and after-school instruction in literacy and math each week. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Teachers in science and social studies differentiate learning for these ELLs by using visuals and manipulatives to illustrate concepts, and graphic organizers are used to sequence steps and increase students’ ability to recall information. ELLs with special needs have guided instruction that match the students’IEPs, along with differentiated instruction planned collaboratively with the ESL teacher and the Special Education staff. Collaboration between all providers is the focus of our plan to enrich instruction and assist students in the classroom.. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To maximize language development we offer our ELLs students a large selection of resources, including materials such as classroom libraries, Side by Side, Shining Star and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. Oral communication skills are developed through the use of Read-Alouds and Shared Reading experiences, and technology is used to enrich the curriculum across the content areas. Classroom teachers differentiate instruction to engage students in the reading and writing process. Thus, a language and print rich environment provides support for cognitive language acquisition. The curriculum includes stories about families, life in a new country, as well as adjustments to new surroundings. Further, it is sensitive to the ethnicity, culture and customs of each student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL /SWD are enrolled in our pull-out ESL program and receive mandated ELL services. The ESL teacher monitors the academic progress and language development of those students. The classroom teacher and the ESL teacher determine if the child should receive additional AIS services. Further, the after-school tutorial program is also employed as a support for children with IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For the current school year, we offer a sequence of intervention services that are designed to meet the needs of our students. Our ESL teacher and content area teachers provide additional intervention services for targeted students. All content area teachers (including ELA, MATH, and science teachers) participate in the AIS program. The AIS program has push-in and pull-out components. All content area teachers provide AIS services three times a week. In addition to the AIS program, ELL students receive are enrolled in the extended day and after-school programs to get extra support in math, language instruction, and other content areas. All intervention programs are designed for small groups of students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017-2018 school year, we redesigned the AIS program (see question 9); added Spanish as a foreign language and Spanish club). Our ESL students benefit from getting additional instructional support. There will also be a cultural club that students will be able to participate in. Our ESL teacher will also push-in to core content classrooms for her ELL students to ensure in adequate differentiation and scaffolding. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are offered ESL content area instruction aligned with NYC and NYS Common Core Learning standards in ELA, math, science and social studies. Besides receiving the mandated ESL services, students receive 90 minutes of ELA instruction daily. In addition, our instructional program offers all students, including ELLs, grade and age appropriate day, extended day and after-school intervention services in literacy and math each week. Their program also includes electives such as art, technology and college and career seminar, and community service, foreign language, and clubs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To maximize language development we offer our ELLs students a large selection of resources, including materials such as classroom libraries, texts such as Side by Side and Shining Star and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. Oral communication skills are developed through the use of read-alouds and shared reading experiences, and technology is used to enrich the curriculum across the content areas. Classroom teachers differentiate instruction to engage students in the reading and writing process. Thus, a language and print rich environment provides support for cognitive language acquisition. The curriculum includes stories about families, life in a new country, as well as adjustments to new surroundings. Further, it is sensitive to the ethnicity, culture and customs of each student. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ESL teacher collaborates with bilingual teachers to determine when support is needed in content areas. Native language support is frequently provided by our ELA and social studies teachers in the mainstream classroom. Content area teachers provide written instructions and guidelines in students' native language to foster comprehension, academic and language development. In addition, ELL students use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in all content areas.. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. To maximize language development we offer our ELLs students a large selection of resources, including materials such as classroom libraries, texts such as Side by Side and Shining Star and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. Oral communication skills are developed through the use of read-alouds and shared reading experiences, and technology is used to enrich the curriculum across the content areas. Classroom teachers differentiate instruction to engage students in the reading and writing process. Thus a language and print rich environment provides support for cognitive language acquisition. The curriculum includes stories about families, life in a new country, as well as adjustments to new surroundings. Further, it is sensitive to the ethnicity, culture and customs of each student. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students in transition from elementary to intermediate school participate in an orientation session before entering I.S. 59. Parents are invited to become acquainted with various programs and translation service is provided as applicable. Students receive information about the academic and enrichment opportunities available to them. They get a tour of the building and meet the staff who will be working with them. Students who are transitioning into high school meet with the guidance counselor who assists them in reviewing the high school directory and completing the application process. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish (foreign language instruction); Spanish clubs. All Spanish-speaking students are members of the Spanish club. They benefit from the additional language instrucion provided in their native language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff members, including administrators, the Guidance Counselor, Secretary, Family Assistant, Parent Coordinator and general and special education teachers are provided with professional development relevant to the needs of our ELLs. Professional development workshops are provided by school staff and the School Support Organization to expand teachers’ repertoire in scaffolding instruction for ELL students. Teachers are also encouraged to attend professional development offerings through the Office of English Language Learners and Bilingual Education/ESL Technical Assistance Center (BETAC). Our tentative Professional Development calendar for the 2017-2018 school year includes: September 2017: Looking at ELL Data; October 2017: Engaging All Learners in Instruction; November 2017: Questioning and Discussion Techniques December 2017: Selecting Appropriate Vocabulary for Word Study January 2018: The Language of the ELA February 2018: The Language of MATH March 2018: Getting Ready for NYSESLAT April 2018: What the Data Says… May 2018: Looking Forward: Planning for September This includes the 7.5 hours of ESL training provided by the Learning Support Organization and the (BETAC). Workshops include: Scaffolding Strategies for ELLs, Analysis and Interpretation of Data, and Understanding the NYSESLAT and the Implications for Instruction 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members, including administrators, the Guidance Counselor, Secretary, Family Assistant, Parent Coordinator and general and special education teachers are provided with professional development relevant to the needs of our ELLs. Professional development workshops are provided by school staff and the School Support Organization to expand teachers’ repertoire in scaffolding instruction for ELL students. Teachers are also encouraged to attend professional development offerings through the Office of English Language Learners and Bilingual Education/ESL Technical Assistance Center (BETAC). Our tentative Professional Development calendar for the 2017-2018 school year includes: September 2017: Looking at ELL Data; October 2017: Engaging All Learners in Instruction; November 2017: Questioning and Discussion Techniques December 2017: Selecting Appropriate Vocabulary for Word Study January 2018: The Language of the ELA February 2018: The Language of MATH March 2018: Getting Ready for NYSESLAT April 2018: What the Data Says… 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  May 2018: Looking Forward: Planning for September This includes the 7.5 hours of ESL training provided by the Learning Support Organization and the (BETAC). Workshops include: Scaffolding Strategies for ELLs, Analysis and Interpretation of Data, and Understanding the NYSESLAT and the Implications for Instruction Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have developed a process for the staff to meet with the parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. In order to ensure this occurs, staff has put in place meetings with parents by semesters, and as well as progress report updates for the parents. The ELL teacher communicates with parents in the parents accesible mode, such as letters home, phone calls, emails, or conferences. If translation serves are needed they are provided. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including the parents of ELL students are invited to participate in the PTA and all regular school workshops. To support newly arrived families, the Parent Coordinator does outreach for parents to indicate the areas of need and schedules workshops in which they are invited to participate. In addition, they are encouraged to become involved in school celebrations and cultural events such as Culture Day, holiday concerts, curriculum fairs, award ceremonies and talent shows. They are also offered the opportunity to come to school on selected days to learn technology skills and view their children’s performance data. Four bilingual staff members provide translation services when needed. Bilingual staff members provide support in different languages, including Spanish and Haitian-Creole Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carleton Gordon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 
