2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q063 School Name: P.S. 063 OLD SOUTH Principal: DIANE MARINO COLEMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Old South 342700010063 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q063 90-15 SutterAvenue Ozone Park, New York 11417 718-845-7560 Phone Number: 718-845-7269 Fax: Catherine O'Sullivan cosulli3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Diane Marino Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Gregory Amundson JeidyReyes Kathleen Cavanaugh SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JeidyReyes N/A N/A N/A Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 8201 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11417 mbarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5800 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11417 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diane Marino Gregory Amundson JeidyReyes Patricia Dardani Sacha Morales JaclynCarrion KathleenCavanagh *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Natasha Acosta Yu MeiLing AlexaReyes Colon Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS 63Q is a diverse collaborative school community dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all our students through integrated programs in Literacy and Math. Our mission reflects our goal to produce lifelong learners who are high academic achievers. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 63Q is proud to have developed strong partnerships with several prestigious arts organizations in order to bring the rich cultural experiences of New York City into the classroom. These collaborations include: a partnership with Carnegie Hall/The Julliard School, ‘Music and the Brain’ and 'Little Kids Rock.' Our 5 th grade has ‘Dancing Classrooms’ from the American Ballroom Theater. In addition, we have provided musical choices for students in different grades. Students in grades 4 and 5 can participate in Concert Band (clarinet, flute, trumpet, French horn, alto saxophone, trombone, and drums), Modern Band (guitar, bass, keyboard, drum set), and a choral group. All performance ensembles are showcased each month in grade level assemblies. All students in Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten and 1st Grade participate in a Dance Festival every Spring. To instill a feeling of pride and achievement, we recognize student achievement. Monthly certificates for student achievement are given in a special assembly at the end of the month. Classes with 100% of students in uniform as well as students who have 100% attendance each month are showcased on a bulletin board . In addition, we promote leadership opportunities for students in the PS 63Q Student Council. A student representative is assigned a ‘buddy class’ in grades K, 1 or 2. Each of these students also acts as a representative for the ‘buddy class’ and keeps the class informed of pertinent activities and information. Parents have been involved in over 30 workshops organized by the Parent Coordinator. They cover a wide range of topics on instructional and health related issues including: nutrition, dental, finance, bookmaking and middle-school transition. Families participate in a Book Club, Math and Literacy night, and Family Movie night. Parents are invited to attend trips run by the Parent Coordinator each spring. We received a grant from Parents as Art Partners for quilt making workshops where families create art together focusing on the school wide character trait initiative. Academic Intervention Service teachers have presented strategy workshops to assist parents in ways to help their children. Parent Teacher Association meetings are held in the morning and evening every month. The P.T.A. holds functions throughout the year such as Book Fairs, Bake Sale, Holiday Boutiques, Community Outreach and Volunteering in the school. Throughout the year, parents and students have been involved in numerous community charitable causes. Sizable amounts of money were collected for Breast Cancer Awareness; American Heart Association, Ronald McDonald House and Autism. With the help of the school community the Parent Coordinator collected canned foods for City Harvest. Our focus on building literacy and communication skills of our students is a top priority. Each morning the academic vocabulary word is announced through the P. A. system. One student announces the word, reads the definition and creates a sentence with the new word. Each week a student from each grade has an opportunity to participate. The students are encouraged to use these words in their writing and conversation. Sustained Reading has been incorporated into the daily schedule. All students, teachers, and staff silently read from 8:00 – 8:15 a.m. 2018-19 CEP 10  We provide students with opportunities to explore options for the future and become involved in varied avenues of interest. Parents and staff members have volunteered their time to participate in career week where parents and staff share information about their jobs and discuss college and career choices with our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The information from the Ethnic Identification forms indicate that over the past several years our population has grown to include many recent immigrants from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Guyana, and the Caribbean. These demographics have necessitated developing strategies for addressing needs and awareness in an effort to ensure these new-comers and their families feel welcome. It has also focused our attention on teaching respect for all nationalities and ethnicity through literature and the arts. Since our school constitutes a ‘melting pot’ of ethnic groups, languages, and cultures, our practices as educators are designed accordingly. Our school has created an art club, chorus, modern band and concert band showcasing various cultures. A key area of focus is our growing ELL population. As per the home language survey, data indicates the ELL population has grown from 13% in 2017 to 13.25% in 2018. To address the needs of this sub-group, we have three ENL teachers and are providing push-in services in various subject areas including math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-18 school year, we have focused on building connections between staff and with parents. PS 63 made great progress in the element Collaborative Teachers as evidenced by the advanced level of teamwork and teachers participating in weekly professional development and sharing best practices. In addition, we have made progress in Rigorous Instruction which was a key area of focus for the school year. Although we have improved in Strong Family and Community Ties, this is a key area of focus as we increase the use of student-led conferences and offer new opportunities for parents to become more involved in the school community. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q063 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1227 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 85 85 49 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 36 43 49 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 76.6% % Reduced Lunch 14.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.6% 48.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.09 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 50.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 96 96 49 92.9% 9.5% 16.2% 5.5% 34.5% 4.8% 6 1% 8.2 52.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A NO YES YES YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the most recent data, 58% of students met the standards on the New York State Math Exam. Although this is a 3% improvement from the previous year, 42% of our students are still not meeting the standard in mathematics in grades 3, 4 and 5. Since the math curriculum is rigorous and challenging for students, we are providing additional supports during the regular class time as well as after school. The use of manipulatives and technology in Think Central provides individualized activities to support students in their areas of need and push them to the next level. While our most recent ELA state test results indicate that overall the students have improved, the bottom third has dropped slightly on the state exam. Our sub-groups still need additional support. The most recent NYS math standardized test results indicate that only 23.5% of Students with Disabilities and 14.1% of our current English Language Learners have met the standards in mathematics . To address the needs of the ELLs, the ENL teachers are pushing in during the math periods to provide focused support for the current and former ELLs. The school utilizes Go Math beginning of year assessments to identify student areas of strengths and needs. Based on the baseline assessment results, we scaffold instruction and group students according to their needs and strengths. Our priority need is to improve student math performance on both classroom and state assessments by providing support for students in their areas of need in small groups and through academic intervention for all Tier 2 and Tier 3 students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers implementing targeted instructional math activities for students, there will be a 20% increase in the percentage of K-5 students demonstrating proficiency as measured by the 2019 end of year Go Math assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Benchmark students' math levels during the 2018-2019 school year using the Go Math assessment at least 3 times during the course of the year and use these results for planning and providing support for students. K-5 students Sept. 2018-June 2019 K-5 teachers Principal Utilize a 90 minute math block to provide mini-lesson and small group or individualized activities for students. Think Central and Go Math activities are used based upon student needs. K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals K-5 teachers students Principal Academic Intervention Services (AIS) provided for students in small groups with focus on skill deficits. Students are rotated into the program as needed based upon classroom performance, Go Math assessment results and teacher recommendations. After school small group math instruction is also available. Assistant Principals K-5 students Sept. 2018- K-5 teachers June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Paraprofessionals AIS providers Provide Students with Disabilities with targeted instruction provided by Special Education teachers who focus on the IEP needs as well as mathematical and vocabulary gaps. SWDs Sept. 2018- June 2019 Special Education teachers Licensed ENL teachers will provide focused support for English Language Learners during math instructional period as well as pull-out to support students' individualized needs. ELLs Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning at September Meet the Teacher Night, parents are provided with information about Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core as well as strategies to support their children at home. In addition to bi-monthly workshops 2018-19 CEP 14  related to the expectations and curriculum, classroom teachers set up weekly meetings with individual parents as needed. The Parent Coordinator is responsible for arranging the workshops. All parents are invited to the classrooms to attend student-led conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Go Math assessments, Think Central, AIS providers, per session for after school program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the percentage of K-5 students demonstrating proficiency as measured by the 2019 mid-year Go Math assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Go Math assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the most recent Quality Snapshot, 86%of people surveyed indicated that they believe the school provided a supportive environment. The majority of teachers (72%) who teach students in grades pre K through 5 agreed or strongly agreed that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school and 92% of teachers indicate that students are taught how to advocate for themselves. Overwhelmingly, teachers and parents have responded that the school is a safe environment. Specifically, 100% of teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and cafeteria and 96% of families say their children are safe at their school. Teachers have challenged and encouraged their students as evidenced by 78% of teachers responding that students try hard to get good grades. Since we have a very diverse student body, we find the need to build student understanding and appreciation of their differences. In order to increase student awareness of other students' needs, the Sanford Harmony Program was introduced in the classrooms. During the 2017-18 school year, strategies from "Meet Up and Buddy Up" were used in some classrooms at PS 63Q. We are expanding the program to all classrooms for the 2018-19 school year. Our priority need is to improve the culture of the school by encouraging students to respect and better understand one another and provide support for their social and emotional growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students in grades K-5 will discuss experiences and solve problems resulting in diverse students coming together to interact and support one another as measured by teacher assessments from the Sanford Harmony program. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive training on the Harmony Program focusing on respect and socialization skills. Teachers Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Guidance Counselors On a daily basis, students will participate in the Meet Up segment of Harmony Program focused on building communication among peers, building problem solving skills and socialization. Students will participate in the Buddy Up segment of the Harmony program where they work in pairs on projects and activities. K-5 students Sept. 2018 -June 2019 All classroom teachers Guidance Counselors Principal Assistant Principals K-5 students Sept. 2018- Teachers June 2019 Special Education teachers will receive Mindfulness training so that they can work with Students with Disabilities on strategies to deal with stress and challenges in order to improve behavior and build self esteem. SWDs Guidance Counselors Sept. 2018- June 2019 Special Education teachers Guidance Counselors Principal Assistant Principals Classroom celebrations highlighting various cultures. Workshops for parents of ELLs to provide additional support. ELLs Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents of ELLs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  Beginning in the September Meet the Teacher Night, teachers will inform parents of the Harmony Program. Guidance Counselors will provide workshops for parents on strategies to support their children and techniques to reduce stress. In addition, Guidance Counselors are available on Tuesdays to meet with parents to address students' academic and personal challenges. All parents are invited by their children to attend student-led conferences during the school year where students' academic and personal growth are discussed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Harmony program, Mindfulness program, Guidance Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students in grades K-5 will discuss experiences and solve problems resulting in diverse students coming together to interact and support one another as measured by teacher assessments from the Sanford Harmony program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Rubric from Harmony program Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Principal Performance Report, teacher team work was rated as an area of celebration. The Superintendent indicated, "Teachers meet and share best practices through grade and vertical teams and professional learning." In addition, she stated, “Teacher inquiry provides data based rationale and analysis of student work that inform their decisions to adjust practice and create goals for groups of students.” As per the NYC School Survey, 79% of teachers indicated that their professional development experiences have been positive, however this is 1% below the district average. Students in grades K-5 are assessed at least three times a year using the Fountas & Pinnell benchmark kit and rated monthly on assessments from Ready Gen. Teachers in grade teams analyze the results and identify specific areas for reading development. In grade teams, teachers work together on addressing students’ deficits by planning strategies to meet student performance needs and reviewing student assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation. As indicated in the most recent School Quality Snapshot, 46% of the students met standards on the NY State English Language Arts exam which was above the district rate of 38%. The average score at the school was 2.9 out of 4.5. We have met the target for student achievement, however the vast majority of our kindergarten students come in as non-readers and many first and second graders are reading below grade level. Therefore, it is essential to provide supports for students in the lower grades to ensure that they are on level before they reach the testing grades. Ramifications for these statistics are obvious as students in grade 3-5 will be taking New York State tests. Students in grades K – 2 struggle in comprehension and phonics and need to be given differentiated support in order to meet the standards in the testing grades. Our priority need is to develop literacy goals for children from when they enter the school and maintain a focus on students’ reading needs. This will be accomplished by providing professional development to teachers on the implementation of guided reading strategies in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional development on guided reading for all literacy teachers, 80% of students in grades K-5 will improve in reading comprehension and fluency as measured by students moving two or more Fountas & Pinnell levels from the Fall 2018 baseline assessment . 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assess' students' reading levels at least 3 times during 2018 – 2019 school year using Fountas & Pinnell benchmark kit and use these results for planning and providing support for students. Teachers meet at grade assessment meetings to review student data gathered from Fountas & Pinnell and plan lessons to address the needs of students. Provide intervention for students in grades K & 1 using Fundations intervention kit. Use of scaffolding instruction strategies from Ready Gen program. Teacher teams will establish and follow a protocol to look at samples of student work, identify deficiencies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers K-5 Students K-2 students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators Grade leaders Teachers Grade leaders Teachers Administrators SWDs and ELLs will receive guided support individually or in small groups as needed. Students with Disabilities will be provided support from licensed Special Education teachers and English Language Learners will be provided with focused supports from licensed ENL teachers. Teachers collaborate weekly to discuss student progress and needs. SWDs ELLs Students will participate in book clubs with their peers and adults Students Professional development on strategies for guided reading. Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2018 ENL teachers SWD teachers Sept. 2017- June 2019 Teachers Oct. 2018 – April 2019 Administrators Grade team leaders, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to attend Meet the Teacher night where teachers will discuss strategies with parents to support their children at home. In addition, parents are welcome to set up appointments with teachers and teachers will invite parents to attend meetings to discuss expectations. Monthly workshops will focus on helping parents understand the curriculum and ways to assist their children. Families will be invited to family 2018-19 CEP 20  reading nights throughout the school year. Parent will sign up to become a "Secret Reader" in their child's class. We will implement child/parent book clubs to encourage reading at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use of Fountas & Pinnell benchmark kit throughout the school year to ensure that students are placed in appropriately leveled books for independent reading. The use of Fundations to teach phonics and build student reading fluency. All teachers will analyze student work and plan reading objectives that are clear, measurable and achievable each week on Tuesday afternoons in planning meetings, during the school day, and once a month in collaborative learning on Monday afternoons. Academic intervention services is provided two times a week. Per-session will be used for after school program to support literacy needs of students. Guided Reading will be implemented in the classroom on a regular basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of professional development on guided reading for all literacy teachers, 50% of students in grades K-5 will improve in reading comprehension and fluency as measured by students moving at least one Fountas & Pinnell level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & Pinnell assessment, Fundations, Ready Gen reading assessment and rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the most recent Principal Performance Observation, the Superintendent commented, "Administrators and teacher leaders are able to identify distributed leadership structures that are deeply routed in the daily operation of the school community. A variety of teacher leaders serve as a conduit for teacher input in strategic decisions that affect the overall improvement of teaching and learning." The teacher leaders have recognized that writing is a major area of concern. In an effort to address this, several of these teachers attended workshops on a new writing program, "The Writing Revolution." This program will be rolled out to all teachers during the 2018-2019 school year. Since many of our students enter our school with limited English and literacy skills, our focus is to provide professional development for staff on strategies of building writing skills and including daily opportunities for students to write in the classroom. Based upon the data, our priority need is to provide support for teachers on strategies to create student ownership of learning and increase the level of critical thinking by providing increased opportunities for students to build writing skills through the use of the writing process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of the Writing Revolution, 70% of students in grades K-5 will meet the writing standards as measured by end of unit school level assessments. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Meet with all teachers at Initial Planning conferences to set professional goals for the 2018-19 school year focused on implementing the writing process. Professional development will be provided on Monday afternoons. The Professional Development Team will meet each week to discuss strategies to incorporate from of The Writing Revolution. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 Administrators Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be provided with strategies during small groups. SWDs ELLs Sept. 2018- June 2019 Students will be given opportunities to self edit and peer edit their writing. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Professional Development team members ENL teachers Special Education teachers Administrators Assistant principals Teachers AIS teachers Students will publish final writing pieces at end of each writing unit. Students Sept. 2018- Teachers June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During monthly Parent Teacher Association Meetings, the Principal will provide parents with information regarding writing assignments. In addition, parents will be invited into classroom for celebrations of final writing presentations. Parent workshops will be organized by Parent Coordinator to provide parents with strategies and skills to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade leaders to provide professional development on The Writing Revolution Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the implementation of the Writing Revolution, 40% of students will show improvement in writing as indicated by their mid year writing assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. End of unit writing pieces , Writing Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Attendance figures at parent workshops and meetings during the prior year increased from previous years however we recognize the need to continue to encourage parents to participate by providing frequent workshops and meetings of high interest to parents. We are committed to building partnerships with parents through monthly parent activities and workshops focused on supporting students’ social, emotional and instructional needs. As per the NYC School Survey, 69% of parents/ guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year they have been asked or had opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Through the increase of parent involvement, we hope to work closely with families to ensure students’ success. During the 2016-17 school year, we introduced student-led conferences which proved to be an extremely effective way of increasing parent involvement and student participation. These student-led conferences have also increased the communication skills and self esteem of our students. For the 2018-2019 school year, every parent will be invited to at least one student-led conference, thereby increasing parent participation in their children's learning. In recognition of the critical roles of parents as partners, our priority need is to increase parent involvement in their children’s educational experience. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the parent coordinator survey and teacher outreach, there will be a 3% increase in the per cent (from 69% to 72%) of parents/guardians responding that since the beginning of the year they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will invite parents to attend student-led conferences on Tuesday afternoons. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers School workshops address students’ needs including SWDs and ELL and the implementation of student-led workshops. SWDs Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal ELLs Parents Regular communication with parents with school messenger, school internet page, and DOJO. Student-led conferences will be held weekly during parent engagement. Parents Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Survey of parents regarding student-led conferences. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals ENL teachers Special Education teachers Parent coordinator Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Parent coordinator Guidance Counselors Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Boys and Girls of America, Blue Cross Blue Shield provides health workshops/insurance options, Thrive, and New York Smile provides no cost pediatric dental services. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  School-wide events calendar, Tuesday afternoon engagement, school messenger, and parent coordinator. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 40% of parents/guardians will have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school as measured by parent coordinator and teacher records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent coordinator and P.T.A. records of parent volunteers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One 50-minute period, 3-5 times a week, based on needs. Students are instructed in small groups. Services provided during the school day as well as after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) GradesK -3 students scoring at levels 1 or 2 on Fountas & Pinnell Grade 4 students- median score on NYS ELA falls between 284 and 319. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations intervention (grades K & 1) Fountas & Pinnell Intervention (grades K - 3) Differentiated instruction in all ELA classes through selected reading activities including guided reading and ReadyGen interventions. Mathematics Grade5 students- median score on ELAfalls between263 and 319. . Go Math Inventory test - students scoring below grade level in grades 1-3 Grade 4 students - median score on NYS One 50-minute period, 3-5 times a week, based on needs. Students are instructed in small groups Services provided during the school day as well as during after school. Differentiated instruction in all math classes – RTI Tier I. Through frequent content and skills based assessments, the effectiveness of TierI will be 2018-19 CEP 28  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) mathbetween 260 and 315 Grade 5 students - median score on NYS math between 208 and 315 determined. Students who need small group strategic instruction and more frequent assessment will be referred for Tier2 & 3instruction, these are identified students needing intervention with increased frequency and longer duration . Teacher recommendation . Teacher recommendation and 4 th grade NYS science test. Hands-on experimentation infused within classroom science instruction. Classroom assessments Teacher recommendation Students experiencing behavioral and or emotional issues. Science lab equipped to provide Tiers2 and3 intervention services. Social studies period tailored to meet the needs of individual students includingTiers 2 and 3intervention services. Group and individual counseling provided byguidance counselors during the school day.Support given to allstudents experiencing behavioral and or emotional issues. One 50-minute period of AIS instruction in Science per week. Services are provided during the school day. Small group Services are provided during the school day . Small group Services are provided during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 34 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Supplies including notebooks, bookbags and story books. School uniforms. Guidance counselors will provide support for students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff hires some staff through Open Market and attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers to work as Early Childhood teachers, ENL teachers and Special Education teachers. The secretary will work closely with the HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher Evaluation System and Danielson Rubric English Language Arts Curriculum Maps Ready Gen rubrics Implementation of Go Math Program Teacher teams conducting inquiry and analysis of student work Engaging Students in Higher Order Thinking Feedback from Low Inference Observations Inter-visitations with focus Professional development on higher order questioning and assessment Ready Gen-Presenter from Pearson 2018-19 CEP 32  Understanding the Literacy Shifts in Science and Social Studies End of the Year Reflections Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school provides an orientation meeting for parents of preschool students entering the elementary school program. Information packets and support are also provided for parents that include tips and techniques for parents to use at home to support and promote literacy and numeracy. Families have the opportunity to meet administrators, teachers and support staff before students enter Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in all aspects of assessment decisions. Members of the Measures of Student Learning committee meet to discuss the assessments given throughout the year. The committee consists of teachers from all grades and curriculum areas. Teacher teams on each grade meet weekly to analyze the data and share strategies used to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 33  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 580,921.00 142,853.00 23,758.00 0 6,650,714.00 x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d,6,7 5a, 5b, 5c 5a,5b,5c,6 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 34  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS63Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS63Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 CEP 36  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 38  PS63Q,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year our Title III Supplemental Program activities will occur after school as indicated in the Title SAM #31's guidelines. Our After School Program for third, fourth, and fifth grade students is designed to help ELLs construct and apply academic knowledge, acquire new vocabulary, and improve reading, writing, and listening skills so they can achieve academic success in literacy and mathematics. This supplemental instructional program will also provide reading and math skills which are aligned with the Common Core standards in literacy and mathematics. In order for our ELLs to be successful on NYS standardized assessments i.e., NYS ELA Exam, NYS Mathematics Exam, and NYSESLAT, the program will focus on rigorous texts and test-taking strategies. Materials and instruction will target the different text types as outlined in the Common Core Standards. Based on a review of data from the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), according to the At-Risk Level Comparison for 27Q063 about 22% (39 ELLs) are at Level 1, 7% (13 ELLs) are at Level 2, 7% (13 ELLs) are at Level 3, 12% (21 ELLs) are at Levels 3 and 4 combined, and 8% (15 ELLs) are at Level 5 and above. Data from the EDAT also indicates that based on 2017 NYSESLAT results for grades 4 and 5 the number of ELLs scoring high in the reading modality is not as high as in grade 3. As such, the benefit from this supplemental instructional program would continue to work toward closing the gap between academic expectations and current student performance. The cost of our Title III After School Program represents 60% of the total allocation for Title III Supplemental Programs for ELLs. There are 80 ELLs enrolled in the After School Program: 24 Entering/Emerging, 17 Transitioning, 15 Expanding and 24 Commanding/former ELLs. Six (6) of the participating ELLs are from self-contained and ICT classes and are mainstreamed for literacy and math during the school day. Our After School Program consists of twenty-six (26) sessions which begin in January 2019 and end in April 2019. Each session is 90 minutes from 2:30 to 4:00 PM every Wednesday and Thursday. There are about 8 ELLs per class. There are two (2) ENL teachers and eight mainstream teachers. Teachers will receive the current teacher per session rate of $50.13. The ENL teachers will provide inter-class rotations every 30 minutes within the 90 minute sessions. This will ensure that the needs of the ELLs are targeted. A supervisor will oversee the program due to the large number of students and teachers. In the After School Program, ELLs receive instruction in English by certified ENL teachers and teachers certified in Common Branches. During grade level professional development, ENL teachers meet with the teachers and supervisors involved in the program to develop support strategies used in the program. Two (2) NYS certified ENL teachers will provide one workshop for eight (8) mainstream teachers. Teachers will receive the current teacher per session rate of $50.13. The NYS certified ENL and mainstream teachers will use Common Core standards to develop rigorous instruction with multiple entry level points for ELLs at all English proficiency levels. Common Core Coach – English Languages Arts and Common Core Coach - Mathematics will be used to provide test-taking strategies and concentrate on a variety of text types and mathematics problem solving. In addition to the use of these resources, teachers will scaffold and differentiate instruction based on the academic needs of the students. ELLs are also provided with intensive instruction utilizing proven ENL strategies to promote problem solving skills and 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information success on performance tasks. Schema building, bridging, and text representation are some of the ways we will accomplish our goals. In addition, an after school book study group led by a certified ENL teacher will explore ways to combine meaningful assessment methods with ENL methodology to meet the needs of our ELLs. The After School Program also offers additional opportunities for group academic assistance and socialization in a small group setting. This ensures that ELLs not only receive support within their mainstream classrooms, but also have an opportunity to receive individualized support beyond regular school hours. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On-going professional development will be provided for all teachers responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. Teachers will receive professional development to familiarize them with ENL strategies and techniques that will help to support ELLs in our After School Program and in mainstream classrooms as well. Topics for professional development are based on the academic needs of our ELLs. Research-based targeted instruction along with current theories of second language acquisition is the core of our ENL program. Monthly professional development workshops provide opportunities for certified ENL teachers to share current research and new resources with mainstream teachers to help promote English language proficiency for ELLs. In addition, certified ENL teachers will attend professional development seminars and conferences offered by the UFT Teacher Center and the Queens South Field Support Center (QSFSC) . They will “turn-key” new strategies and methodologies that can be implemented to differentiate instruction to the meet the language and academic needs of our ELLs. General education teachers will also have access to demonstration lessons, inter-class visitations, and a variety of ENL resources. Teachers will meet to identify former ELLs who would benefit from Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and intensive reading instruction, using the Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kit for ELLs for grades K – 2. Professional development will also be provided in an after school book study group made possible by Title III funding. A certified ENL teacher will lead a group of six (6) teachers at per session rate using the book Speech to Print - Language Essentials for Teachers (2nd Edition) by Luisa Moats. The group will explore ways to use a variety of research-based strategies to promote effective targeted instruction and turn daily classroom lessons and activities into valuable opportunities to help ELLs gain English language proficiency and meet Common Core State Standards. The book study group will consist of five (5) 1-hour sessions in May and June 2019. The following dates and topics will be covered during the course of the book study group: May 8 "Why Study Language?" May 15 "The Structure of English Orthography; The Structure of Morphology" May 22 "Syntax: How Sentences Work" May 29 "Semantics: Word and Phrase Meaning" , June 5 "Language and Reading Instruction" In 2018/2019, ENL teachers will share and analyze student data from schoolnet, the EDAT, and the RLAT with general education teachers on Mondays during teacher team time. The data from 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development these powerful tools will be used to create intervention strategies to supplement instruction in both the ENL setting and the general education classroom. Supplemental instruction is made possible by computers in all classrooms. School created assessments in general education classes will provide teachers with crucial formative data to isolate areas in need of support. Working collaboratively, ENL teachers and common branches teachers will create action plans and differentiate instruction to target skills that have not been mastered. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator and other members of the Language Allocation Policy (LAP) team evaluate and address the needs and concerns of our parents. Utilizing data based on information of our ELL population, we provide written translation of school letters and notices to meet the language needs of our parents. The number of home languages have been tabulated and are adjusted throughout the school year to reflect our ELL population. At monthly PTA meetings parents of ELLs are encouraged to become active and involved members of the school community. Translators are available at PTA meetings, parent orientations, and parent-teacher conferences for parents of ELLs. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are asked to complete an annual survey about our school in their native language. The information from these surveys is also used to evaluate and address the needs of our ELLs and their families. The parents of ELLs are given many opportunities to participate in parent workshops throughout the year. The following are activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will positively impact higher achievement for ELLs. These are in addition to mandated activities for ELLs. One NYS certified ENL teacher and the Parent Coodinator, Yolanda Arroyo, will host a Flu Prevention Workshop once a year in October. Sponsored by the Duane Reade Community Off-site Immunization Clinic all adults 18+ can attend and will receive a flu shot with a valid medical insurance card. Translation is provided by the Parent Coordinator and parent volunteers to ensure that all participating parents and families of ELLs benefit from the workshop sessions. Parents are given the opportunity to consent to have their children receive routine dental care from a team of certified dentists from Smile NY. Health Plus will provide workshops given by Lupita Amadias, along with our Parent Coordinator and a NYS certified ENL teacher four (4) times a year. These 90 minute sessions discuss topics pertaining to health issues such as asthma, lice, cancer, etc. Translation is provided by Health Plus Workshops to ensure that all participating parents and families of ELLs benefit from these workshop sessions. Nutrition Workshops, hosted by Ana Clausell from Cornell University-Cooperative Extension, our Parent Coordinator, Yolanda Arroyo, and a NYS certified ENL teacher, are offered for 6-8 consecutive weeks. These two (2) hour sessions are a hands-on learning experience to promote healthy eating and nutrition. Translation is provided by Cornell University-Cooperative Extension to maximize the benefit to parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator, along with one NYS certified ENL teacher and the school librarian, will host two Family Reading Nights each year. The events will take place in the Fall and the Spring from 6:00 to 7:00 PM and will allow families to participate in read alouds with their children in a small group setting. Volunteers from the PTA 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities along with teacher volunteers help to make these events special. Participation has been successful in the past with between 20 to 50 families attending and we look forward to increasing this number going forward. Each child will receive a take-home book, markers, and stickers to help create memorable experiences and a positive attitude toward reading. In response to parental requests, the Parent Coordinator, along with two classroom teachers and the ENL teachers, will host two Homework Help Workshops to help parents who are struggling to help their children with homework. The K-2nd grade workshop will take place on November 13, 2018 and the 3rd-5th grade workshop is scheduled for November 27, 2018. Both workshops will take place on Tuesdays from 2:30 to 3:35 PM. Teachers will provide resources and demonstrate helpful strategies that will help frustrated parents navigate subjects that may be unfamiliar or confusing to them. Our Parent Coordinator, along with a certified ENL teacher, will organize a trip to the Bronx Zoo for ELLs and their families. This trip provides an excellent opportunity for parents and their children to use English in meaningful ways. It also gives ELLs an opportunity to share what they learn in school with their parents. Through our Monthly School Calendar, parents of ELLs are notified of school events, PTA meetings, and the dates of New York State Assessments. The parent workshops and parent trips, made possible by Title III funding, are designed to promote literacy skills in the home. When parents, as well as their children, receive English instruction combined with helpful strategies to help them become proficient in English the academic outcomes will continue to improve. At parent meetings, the ENL teachers continue to stress the importance of developing literacy skills in both the Native Language and English. The ENL teachers provide parents with helpful resources with this purpose in mind. The successful collaboration between our Parent Coordinator, parents, and ENL teachers will result in academic success for our ELLs. Written translation services are provided to meet the needs of parents who speak a language other than English. Parents of ELLs are provided with a translated Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. Also, letters concerning parent orientation workshops, informational videos, and brochures are available in English as well as nine other languages. Staff members and parent volunteers provide oral interpretation and written translation of letters and notices regarding meetings and workshops. When a document needs to be translated, the designated school staff member provides immediate translation. In addition, written translation services are provided by the Translation Unit. All required signage and forms are available in English as well as nine other languages. We have found that as our ELL population becomes more diversified, our need for translators and translation services must become larger to be more in step with family needs. The school will meet the requirement of parent notification with respect to written translation and oral interpretation services by posting the written notification in a conspicuous location near the main office, the Parent Coordinator's office, and the PTA room. It will also be distributed in letter form to all parents at the beginning of the school year. If and when a translator is not available, the school would then ask for support and assistance from parent volunteers. 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Old South School Borough Queens School Number 063 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Diane Marino-Coleman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linda Genao Teacher/Subject Area Gina Bopp Teacher/Subject Area Anna Chi Related-Service Provider Stacey Blatt Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Catherine O'Sullivan Coach type here School Counselor Heatha Lawrence Parent Tiffany Placeres Parent Coordinator Yolanda Arroyo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 5 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1228 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 175 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.25%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 1 K 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 Lang. SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? A team of ENL teachers and related service providers examined and evaluated Fountas and Pinnell reading levels for ELLs in grade K - 5. The majority of ELLs are approaching grade level or are below grade level. ELLs in Kindergarten and first grade have been in the NYC Public School System for a short amount of time and do not have the language and literacy skills needed to read on a Fountas and Pinnell level on or above grade level. We are hopeful that with Fundations, a phonics-based literacy program, along with increased scaffolding techniques, targeted differentiated instruction, and Response to Intervention (RTI) strategies on-going assessments throughout the year will indicate that our efforts are resulting in higher reading levels for our ELL poplulation. Another assessment tool we use is the REACH Pre-Test for English Language Proficiency. This assessment will provide benchmark scores from which ENL and mainstream teachers can develop rigorous instructional plans to help ELLs reach grade level CCLS in all four modalities. 2018-19 CEP 50  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Every Monday during extended day and at grade-level common planning prep periods mainstream teachers and ENL teachers have the opportunity to analyze data and discuss and plan intervention/instructional strategies to help ELLs both in school and at home. The professional development committee along with our data specialist also work with mainstream and ENL teachers to ensure that the structures we have in place to analyze data are used effectively to produce positive instructional outcomes for our ELLs. All ENL teachers share assessment data for grades K-5 with the school leadership team, classroom teachers, and related service providers. All Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, Fundations data, Go Math Unit Tests for K-5, and results from various Performance Tasks are shared during common preps and in teacher team meetings. The data from these assessments will be used to create intervention strategies to supplement instruction in both an ENL setting and mainstream classroom. Assessment is on-going and strategies are adjusted as needed to provide high quality instruction based on current research about language acquisition. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use CCLS - Aligned Baselines/Benchmark Assessments for English Language Arts and Mathematics. The data from these summative assessments are used to identify areas of need and are also used to create intervention strategies to supplement instruction in both an ENL setting and in mainstream classrooms. These assessments are administered and the data is share twice a year. This year the HLA Spanish Performance Assessment - Grade K will be used to assess ELLs in our new Transitional Bilingual Program. Hopefully, the data from this assessment will provide insight into the linguistic needs of our ELLs in their home language. The intervention strategies developed from the data will be used to create a pathway to English literacy instruction in the future. Our school also evaluates the success of our programs for ELLs by examining the annual standardized assessments, such as the NYSESLAT, the NYS English Language Arts, and NYS Mathematics exams. We also review and discuss ELL work at our Teacher Team meetings in collaboration with mainstream teachers. Instruction is adjusted as needed to ensure that the academic needs of our ELLs are addressed. We also use NYSESLAT data to evaluate the success of our ELL programs. The data identifies the academic achievement and needs of specific subgroups and allows us to design targeted, data-driven instructional programs to positively impact student learning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is gathered, it is analyzed by a team of ENL teachers and related service providers, along with mainstream teachers, to look at overall performance on NYS standardized assessments. The data from these powerful assessments is used to create differentiated intervention strategies based on English proficiency levels as well as to help develop effective Math and ELA intervention strategies. Success from our intervention strategies is expected within a reasonable time frame. When ELLs fall short of academic expectations, we design and implement more effective instructional programs. Instruction is differentiated and drawn from multiple sources to meet the learning needs of our ELLs. Instructional strategies are adjusted as needed to provide high quality instruction. Summative data is also used to identify all ELLs who are at-risk in grades 2-5. These students are targeted for Academic Intervention Services (AIS) in reading and math with home language support, whenever possible. Students receive differentiated instruction to address individual needs based on the assessment data in both ELA and Math. Home language support is provided whenever possible by an ENL teacher or by providing ELLs with a partner who speaks the same language and is able to provide support and explain academic expectations. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ENL teachers will share student assessment data for grades K - 5 with the school leadership team, classroom teachers, and related service providers. All Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, School Net Assessments for grades 3 - 5, data from Go Math 2018-19 CEP 51  Unit Tests for K - 5 and Performance Tasks, along with NYS English Arts and Mathematics assessments are shared during common preps and in teacher team meetings. The data from these powerful tools will be used to create intervention strategies to supplement instruction in both the ENL setting and mainstream classroom. Success from our intervention strategies is expected within a reasonable time frame. When ELLs fall short of academic expectations, we design and implement more effective instructional programs. Instruction is differentiated and drawn from multiple sources to meet the learning needs of our at-risk ELLs. Assessment is on-going and strategies are adjusted as needed to provide high quality instruction based on current research about language acquisition. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal that the majority of our ELLs in grades K – 5 are concentrated in the Expanding (Advanced) and Commanding (Proficient) categories. In Kindergarten, 2016 NYSITELL results are as follows: Entering – 5 students, Emerging – 7 students, Transitioning – 8 students, Expanding – 6 students, and Commanding – 9 students. In first grade, 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: Entering – 2 students, Emerging – 6 students, Transitioning – 5, Expanding – 11 students, and Commanding – 0 students. In second grade 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: Entering – 7 students, Emerging – 3, Transitioning – 13 students, Expanding – 8 student, and Commanding – 14 students. In third grade 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: Entering – 2 students, Emerging – 6, Transitioning – 10 students, Expanding – 16 students, and Commanding – 21 students. In fourth grade 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: Entering – 3 students, Emerging – 3 students, Transitioning – 8, Expanding – 14 students, and Commanding – 10 students. In fifth grade 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: Entering – 3 students, Emerging – 4 students, Transitioning – 6 students, Expanding – 7 students, and Commanding – 4 students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We disseminate our findings for the assessment data during extended day and also at grade-level common planning preps. ENL teacher, along with mainstream teachers, share baseline/benchmark assessment data, Home Language Arts (HLA) data, and NYSESLAT results with AIS teachers, cluster teachers, administrators, and other related service providers. The data is used to facilitate planning and- develop strategic targeted instruction to address areas of need. In common planning sessions, a team of ENL teachers review and share NYSESLAT results via the RLAT with administrators, classroom teachers and other service providers and discuss the most effective research-based methodologies to address the academic needs of our ELLs. ELLs are grouped according to proficiency levels and teacher teams plan targeted, rigorous content and language objectives to address the specific content and linguistic needs of our ELLs. By disseminating our findings in this way, we can ensure that our collaborative efforts to ensure the success of our ELLs involves all members of our school community. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 63 Q, integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction is implemented as per CR Part 154.2. In grades K-5, NYS TESOL certified teachers deliver instruction using both a push-in and pull-out model. Four of our five ENL teachers are dually certified i.e. NYS Common Branches and TESOL certification. We have one self-contained ENL class per grade level and ENL teachers deliver integrated ENL instruction along with the classroom teacher. In the self-contained ENL classes, the TESOL certified teachers push-in and co-teach to provide rigorous ENL instruction as 2018-19 CEP 52  the classroom teacher provides CCLS - aligned content instruction. Our push-in ENL program advances student understanding of English as well as enhancing academic content in ELA and Math. The self-contained ENL classes are heterogeneously grouped. Entering/Emerging ELLs benefit from Transitioning/Expanding and Commanding ELLs who serve as language modelts. The push-in model promotes collaboration between classroom teachers and ENL teachers as a result of shared instructional planning and co-teaching. It also diminishes loss of instructional time due to travel time to and from the ENL pull-out classroom. A small percentage of our ELLs receive instruction using a pull-out model. ELLs are grouped homogeneously according to proficiency level. A NYS dually certified ENL and Common Branches teacher provides rigorous content area instruction along with targeted ENL instruction to help promote academic success and English language proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. We have a Kindergarten Transitional Bilingual Program (TBE) at PS 63Q. Instruction is delivered in Spanish and English by a NYS certified bilingual teacher using CCLS - aligned content and Spanish-language resources and materials. Students are heterogeneously grouped and learning objectives are clearly stated in Spanish and English and include both content and linguistics aspects of the curriculum. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At PS 63 Q, we ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to CR Part 154.2 - ENL Units of Study. All self-contained K - 5 ENL classes use the push-in model. In the push-in model, a NYS certified TESOL teacher, along with a classroom teacher, provide 2 units of study each week (360 minutes) for ELLs at the Entering/Emerging level. The 360 minute block consists of 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, ELLs at the Transitioning/Expanding level receive a minimum of 1 unit of study each week (180 minutes). ELLs at the Commanding level, former ELLs, continue to receive services for an additional 2 years. They receive 90 minutes or .5 unit of study per week in integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Four out of five of our ENL teachers are dually certified and deliver targeted ENL/ELA instruction in a self-contained push-in setting. Our ENL teacher delivers ENL/ELA instruction by co-teaching with a NYS certified common branches teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At PS 63 Q, core content is delivered in a Freestanding ENL program. Four of our ENL teachers have dual certifications in ENL and common branches. They are able to use ENL strategies to teach the core content that students would receive from a self-contained common branches classroom teacher. Our dually certified teachers also provide the mandated integrated ENL units required for all ELLs. All ENL classes, including Integrated and Stand-Alone instruction have some form of home language support i.e. glossaries, native language dictionaries, etc. Instructional ENL methodologies and content-area expertise complement one another and accelerate both English language and content learning for ELLs. ENL teachers also use a variety of scaffolds, sheltered instruction i.e. the SIOP model, and differentiation to promote academic success and English language 2018-19 CEP 53  proficiency. At PS 63 Q, in grades K-5, we use Reach (Nat Geo/Cengage), a CCLS-aligned reading and language program. This program provides relevant and engaging science and social studies content along with on-line resources for both students and teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For ELLs who opt to take state exams in their Native Language, efforts are made to provide translations of assessment material. For some our new curricula, such as Go Math, assessments are available online in other languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are students who have attended schools in the United States for less than twelve months and who are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States. At PS 63 Q, SIFE students received targeted differentiated instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking with home language support in both a push-in and pull-out setting. Mathematics instruction involves the use of manipulatives, diagrams, and real-world scenarios to help ELLs understand and master universal mathematics skills. At PS 63 Q, newcomer ELLs are identified under CR Part 154 as ELLs who have received English as a New Language instruction in a Freestanding English as a New Language in both a push-in and pull-out model for a total of zero (0) to three (3) continuously enrolled school years in the United States. Newcomers receive targeted differentiated content and ENL instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking with home language support, when necessary. Mathematics instruction involves the use of manipulatives, diagrams, and real-world scenarios to help ELLs understand and master universal mathematics skills. Developing ELLs are identified under CR Part 154 as ELLs who receive English as a New Language instruction in a Freestanding English as a New Model in a push-in or pull-out model for a total of four (4) to six (6) continuously enrolled school years in the United States. Developing ELLs receive targeted differentiated content and ENL instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking with home language support, if necessary. At PS 63 Q, we have no Long-term ELLs. Former ELLs at PS 63 Q are identified as ELLs who have exited from ELL status. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a New Language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations i.e. “time and a half”. Former ELLs receive targeted differentiated ELA/ENL instruction to help them transition from former ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Unless a student's disability prevents him/her from meaningfully interacting with grade level materials and ELL resources, ELL-SWDs use the same materials as mainstream students, with instructional adaptations, as needed. ENL teachers consult the Pearson Ready Gen Scaffolded Strategies Handbook to ensure appropriate activities are used to provide access to CCLS aligned text and curriculum for all proficiency levels. These materials accelerate English language acquisition by providing rigorous instruction in all four modalities of English language acquisition i.e. listening, reading, writing, and speaking. Other adaptations are made as needed , according to IEPs. ELLs with special needs receive additional support in reading and math in the ENL setting as mandated by their IEPs. The instruction they receive is modified, as needed, depending on their abilities. ENL teachers adapt and scaffold lessons to make texts comprehensible and allow SWD to master writing tasks. ELL-SWDs receive direct vocabulary instruction and multiple exposures to both content and academic vocabulary daily. ENL teachers also use Reach (Nat Geo/Hampton Brown), a comprehensive content-literacy based program. Some ELL-SWDs also receive Academic Intervention Services (AIS) or SETSS to enable them to fully participate in the rigorous instruction at PS 63Q. We use Imagine Learning, a language and literacy program for ELL-SWDs and ELL subgroups. It is an interactive program using differentiated instruction. The program is individualized and follows its own course for each student. It tracks progress 2018-19 CEP 54  and offers supplemental activities which target areas of intervention in reading, listening, and speaking. The program is both predictive and evaluative and focuses on struggling and emergent readers to help accelerate English Language Acquisition. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses scheduling flexibility to support ELL-SWDs with IEP goals by providing small group instruction for our ELLs in a pull-out setting to help them attain English language proficiency. ENL/ELA instruction is delivered by a NYS dually certified teacher. ELL-SWDs and ELLs are grouped homogeneously according to English proficiency level and receive the mandated units of ENL/ELA according to CR Part 154.2. In order to help ELL-SWDs achieve their IEP goals they receive rigorous targeted academic instruction based on the goals outlined in their IEPs in the least restrictive environment. ENL teachers consult with other service providers including AIS, SETSS, APE, OT, PT, Speech, and Guidance to ensure that schedules do not overlap and ELL-SWDs receive the mandated units of study. Special Education teachers and other service providers collaborate to discuss research-based strategies to benefit all ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs in grades K - 5 are targeted for Academic Intervention in Reading with Native Language support, whenever possible. Students receive differentiated instruction to address individual needs and improve academic performance. Although P.S. 63Q does not have any bilingual classes, bilingual support is given throughout all content areas by providing ELLs with a a partner who speaks the same language and is able to provide support and explain tasks and expectations. Having a peer tutor helps ELLs feel more comfortable and helps build self-esteem and confidence needed to help all students meet academic expectations. Former ELLs are encouraged to use their Native Language when appropriate to help them transfer knowledge, develop mental flexibility, and experience a sense of cultural stability and continuity. ELLs use bilingual dictionaries, content glossaries, and audio tapes of texts whenever possible. Imagine Learning, an on-line language and literacy program, provides interactive differentiated instruction which follows its own course for each student. ENL teachers monitor the progress of students by reviewing individual and group reports. Our school follows the RTI model for intervention services. Students, including ELLs, receive Academic Intervention Service (AIS) in reading based on teacher recommendation, benchmark assessments (such as Fountas and Pinnell), and by analyzing data from the NYS ELA exam. ELLs in grade 3 - 5 are tested to determine their ability to recall facts and details, synthesize information, make inferences, and comprehend different genres. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school uses Ready Gen and Reach (Nat Geo/Hampton-Brown). Ready Gen is used city-wide and we supplement instruction by using increased vocabulary strategies and the strategies for ELLs provided by Ready Gen. We focus on the specific academic and linguistic needs of our ELLs by using Imagine Learning. ELLs use iPads and follow an individually designed program to target their specific areas of need. In addition, Flowcabulary, an on-line resource, is used to support vocabulary instruction for our ELLs. Our ELLs also receive targeted literacy instruction by using Reading A-Z, an on-line interactive reading program which individually targets and differentiates instruction. Supplemental and compatible texts provide both rigorous non fiction and fiction texts to help ELLs approach and meet CCLS. Ladders (Nat Geo), lexile-leveled texts, are used to differentiate instruction while allowing all ELLs to have access to grade-level rigorous texts. This year, in grades K-5, our ELLs are using Reach. Reach is a comprehensive language and literacy program which incorporates language, vocabulary, reading, writing, and content for ELLs. It actively engages and immerses students in a connected, expanding, and 2018-19 CEP 55  dynamic language environment. It layers and scaffolds essential skills and strategies to move all learners to independence. Reach easily adapts to meet our instructional priorities and requirements. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to participate in our Title III After School Program and our Title III Supplemental Immigrant Program. The After School Program, which begins in January and ends in April, is offered to all ELLs in grades 3 - 5. This program offers remediation and enrichment in ELA and Math and prepares ELLs for the NYS assessments administered in April and May. It provides ELLs with test-taking strategies along with the targeted instruction they need to achieve mastery on the NYS English Language Arts and Mathematics exams. The Title III Supplemental Immigrant Program provides literacy instruction for newcomers and immigrants by using an integrated approach. Using a thematic curriculum and technology immigrant students, including but not limited to the Caribbean, will receive instruction to help them achieve better literacy skills and be on grade level by third grade. The program consists of first and second grade immigrant students and focuses on phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary development, comprehension, and writing. The goal is for these students to be on grade level by 3rd grade and be ready to take NYS standardized exams. ELLs and their parents are notified by letters in their home languages describing after school supplemental programs offered at PS 63Q. . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Reach (Nat Geo/Cengage) is used for all self-contained ENL classes in grades K - 5. Reach is a research-based program designed to provide active learning opportunities, scaffolded instruction, and flexibility to meet instruction priorities with the aim of moving all ELLs to language proficiency and reading independence. The supplemental books and compatible fiction and non-fiction texts are lexile leveled and provided differentiated instruction for our ELLS. This helps ensure that all ELLs have access to rigorous CCLS - aligned texts. We also use technology to focus on the specific academic and linguistic challenges and needs of our ELLs by using Headsprout, an interactive reading program. ELLs are assigned a user name and password and after taking a placement test are able to log in and continue at their own pace using an individualized program based on the data from their placement tests. The program focuses on early reading skills in grades K - 2 and on reading comprehension in grades 3 - 5. Teachers use the data generated from this program to provide additional targeted instruction for their students. ELLs can use iPads, laptops, and desktop computers in school or at home to follow the individually designed program which targets their specific areas of need. ENL teachers also use supplemental texts, for Ready Gen and Go Math, that support the content and learning objectives. All ELLs at PS 63Q have access to technology including computers, printers, laptops, iPads, document cameras, SmartBoards, and 2018-19 CEP 56  projectors. Technology is used effectively to help support our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program and mainstream classes, home language support is delivered by partnering students who speak the same language. We also provide students with bilingual dictionaries and content area glossaries in several different languages Since Spanish-speaking students are our largest subgroup, we use word lists with English-Spanish cognates to help students understand rigorous texts. In addition, some of our ENL teachers are bilingual and support learning by explaining learning objectives and expectations in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In self-contained ENL classes, our school ensures that all required services/resources support and correspond to the ages and grade levels of our ELLs. All ELLs are placed in age-appropriate grades according to their date of birth. Instructional materials are CCLS - aligned and correspond to grade levels. ENL teachers work collaboratively with mainstream teachers to provide scaffolds that allow for different entry points allowing access for all students. In this way, ELLs of all ages and proficiency levels have access to grade-level rigorous texts. In a pull-out setting, all ELLs are appropriately grouped according to age, grade level, and proficiency level. All instructional materials and lessons correspond to grade levels. All grade level texts are scaffolded to ensure that ELLs, at all proficiency levels , have access to the same rigorous texts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building or resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When students register, they are greeted by an ENL teacher and have the opportunity to become familiar with school procedures and policies. The screening process is explained to parents of newly enrolled eligible students in grades K-5. All parents are invited to an orientation given in September where they will receive important information about our ENL program, academic expectations, and school programs and activities that are available to them. In September, ENL teachers and the Parent Coordinator, Yolanda Arroyo, host the first orientation (other parent orientations are on-going throughout the school year) for parents of newly enrolled ELLs to give parents the important information they need to help their children transition and adapt to the new environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, P.S. 63Q does not have a Dual Language Program. 2018-19 CEP 57  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for ELL personnel at P.S. 63Q is focused on improving teaching practices and student achievement. All staff members, including ELL personnel, collaborate throughout the school year in order to align lessons with Common Core Learning Standards. Weekly meetings, as well as strategic professional development sessions, allow teachers to reflect on best teaching practices which will result in the development of highly effective educators. Our professional development plan is comprehensive and extensive. The following 2016-2017 dates and topics represent some of the on-going professional development at our school: Analyzing Student Work (September 19, 26; October 17, 24; January 23; March 13; April 24), Engaging Students in Higher Order Thinking (November 7, 14; December 12), Data Analysis - Planning Differentiated Instruction (March 6). The ENL Teachers currently provide on-going professional development on the Eight Principles of the Language Allocation Policy (LAP) and its implementation in the school community during workshops conducted on Professional Development Days, i.e. Election Day, November 8, 2016 and Brooklyn-Queens Day June 8, 2017. Workshops are also conducted monthly during grade conferences. In addition, an after school study group, made possible by Title III funding, will develop ENL strategies to be used by the staff in all content areas. The 2017 tentative dates for the book study meetings are April 28, May 5, 12, 19, 26. The new CR Part 154 requires professional development sessions geared toward the needs of ELLs. The new professional requirements are 15% of total hours of ELL-specific professional development for all teachers and 50% of total hours of ELL-specific professional development for ENL teachers. Teachers and other staff members are trained to implement research-based ENL strategies and techniques that actively engage ELLs in standard-based curriculum. These professional development sessions are supportive because they help teachers design targeted instruction to help their students develop critical thinking skills. Professional development sessions on scaffolding allow teachers of ELLs to meet students where they are, and lead them to where they want them to go. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Guidance Counselor meets with fifth grade ELLs in general education classes to share information about open houses and information sessions given by local middle schools. Fifth grade students, including ELLs, visit MS 202 every June to attend an orientation session. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The following personnel receive professional development in all content areas: Asst. Principals, Common Branches teachers, Special Education teachers, ENL teachers, subject area teachers, Guidance Counselors, Psychologists, OT/PT and Speech therapists, paraprofessionals, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator. The professional development programs prepare the entire staff to create and implement challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that will prepare ELLs to think critically and solve problems. Two clerical days in June are used by the staff to collaborate and share information about ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. All new staff members receive 7.5 hours and Special Education staff and paraprofessionals receive 10 hours of training per Jose P. A record of the training received by the staff is on file in the ENL department. Sign-in sheets and agendas are kept on file for all professional development sessions. Some of the topics for professional development may include the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Stages of Second Language Acquisition, Compliance/Testing, Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Finally, all staff members are informed of professional development offered 2018-19 CEP 58  through professional organizations such as UFT, SABE, etc. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Both ENL teachers and mainstream teachers have the opportunity to individually meet with the parents and guardians of ELLs during Parent Engagement time every Tuesday, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial orientations, quarterly progress meetings, or other scheduled meetings provided for parents and guardians. At these meetings, teachers discuss the goals of each student in the ENL program, language development progress, English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes other school staff, if necessary, to sufficiently inform parents and guardians about their child's language development in all content areas in English. These meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters or translators in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Sign-in sheets and agendas are kept on file for all parent meetings. Translators from the LIU, paraprofessionals, the parent coordinator, office staff, and parent volunteers provide translation as needed. Phones are available throughout the building to access over-the-phone interpretation in the event a translator is not available for that language on-site. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator, Yolanda Arroyo, and other members of the Language Allocation Policy (LAP) team evaluate and address the needs and concerns of our parents. Utilizing data based on information of our ELL population, we provide written translation of school letters and notices to meet the language needs of our parents. The number of home languages have been tabulated and are adjusted throughout the school year to reflect our ELL population. At monthly PTA meetings, parents of ELLs are encouraged to become active and involved members of the school community. Translators are available at PTA meetings, parent orientations, and parent-teacher conferences for parents of ELLs. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are asked to complete an annual survey about our school in their native language. The information from these surveys is also used to evaluate and address the needs of our ELLs and their families. The parents of ELLs are given many opportunities to participate in parent workshops throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator organizes a monthly Parent-Child Book Club, organizes a flu vaccine and information session, and hosts a Family Reading Night with the school librarian and ENL teachers. Each year, a homework workshop is offered in November to give parents the tools to help their children at home. Other activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs include Go Math workshops, food drives, and fund raisers. An eight-week health and nutrition workshop is provided by a community based organization that is sponsored by Cornell University. Parents who are interested in learning English are assisted in finding and signing up for English classes in our community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Diane Marino-Coleman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Old South School School DBN: 27Q063 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Diane Marino-Coleman Principal Catherin O'Sullivan Assistant Principal Yolanda Arroyo Parent Coordinator Linda Genao ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tiffany Placeres Parent Gina Bopp Anna Chi Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Heatha Lawrence School Counselor Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/2017 10/20/17 10/20/17 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q063 School Name: Old South School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jesse Diaz ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents of new entrants are asked to complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and are interviewed in their native language and English to determine if a language other than English is spoken at home. If the HLIS indicates that the home language is a language other than English, the NYSITELL is administered to the student to determine eligibility for bilingual education or ENL services. The NYSITELL is scanned and uploaded to ATS and results are used to expedite appropriate student placement. Parents receive notification in their home language regarding entitlement and placement in our ENL program. Students requiring bilingual education or ENL services are entered in ATS on the Indicator Screen as English Language Learners (ELLs). All new emergency cards reflect the home language, along with required contact information. Utilizing data based information on our population of ELLs, we provide written translation of school letters and notices to meet the needs of our parents. We also provide oral translation at school meetings, including parent-teacher conferences, to inform parents about programs and curricula and to explain ways to improve student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE CANTONESE MANDARIN ENGLISH PASHTO (A.K.A. PUSHTO) PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) POLISH SPANISH (AMERICAN) SIGN LANGUAGE) URDU Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 24 147 48 0 0 1281 0 1 14 256 0 17 1.34 8.22 2.68 0 0 71.64 0 0.06 0.78 14.32 0 0.95 21 167 28 11 9 1246 1 1 15 267 2 20 1.17 9.34 1.57 0.62 0.5 69.69 0.06 0.06 0.84 14.93 0.11 1.12 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Back to School Night and ELL Parent Orientations Letters and all other ELL Parent Documentation September and on-going throughout the year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We provide translated brochures, Parent-Teacher conference announcements, Title III After-School program information, New York State testing dates, and Title III ELL Summer Enrichment program information. We use DOE Intranet templates which are translated for all ELL parent documentation. Parents are informed that standardized assessments (other than the New York State English 2018-19 CEP 64 Language Arts Exam) will be given in the child's native language, whenever possible. Parent workshops, conducted by our Parent Coordinator, provide useful information in a language parents can understand. This information helps parents understand that the home environment is crucial in supporting academic achievement. It also increases parent involvement within the school community. The on-going needs of our ELL parents are discussed at LAP(Language Allocation Policy) meetings to ensure that we are committed to improving student achievement. Our goal is to increase parental involvement with the school community in an effort to support shared parent-school accountability. Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements November and March ELL Homework Help November Announcements Meet the Teacher Invitation Letters May We use bilingual staff as well as DOE T& I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages. We use bilingual staff and DOE T & I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages. We use bilingual staff and school-based personnel as needed. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Throughout the school year we host four (4) face-to-face meetings with parents: September, November, March, and May. Parent-teacher conferences and curriculum nights afford parents and teachers the opportunity to interact and discuss the individual needs of their children. Parents have the opportunity to ask questions in their native language and, through the use of translators and interpreters, receive important information to help them support their children as they acquire English as a new language. Back to School Night and ELL Parent Orientations September Parent-Teacher Conferences November and March ELL Homework Help November Meet the Teacher Night May We use bilingual school personnel and over-the-phone interpretation service. We use bilingual school staff. in addition, we bring in on-site interpreters from the vendor agency for other languages. We use bilingual school staff. In addition, for other languages, we bring in on-site interpreters from the vendor agency. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 66  In the event of a school emergency, our school will send a pre-recorded telephone message via "School Messenger" software or a letter translated into the parent's preferred language. All 543 parents will receive emergency pick-up information, in their home language, such as emergency pick-up location and school contact phone numbers. Bilingual school staff will be available to allow LEP parents to reach school personnel in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At faculty meeting, the principal and the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) provide the staff with a list of translators to help with the written translation and oral interpretation needs that may arise throughout the school year. Using time allocated for professional development, the LAC ensures that all staff members are aware of how to use translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation service. The LAC also explains where to find the Translation and Interpretation Brochure and the Language ID Guide in our building. The Language Palm Card is distributed and discussed during professional development sessions giving teachers an opportunity to ask questions and receive important information regarding their ELLs. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have found that as our ELL population becomes more diversified, our need for translators and translation services must become larger and more in step with family needs. The school will meet the requirement of parental notification with respect to translated and interpretation services by posting the written notification in a conspicuous location near the main office, in the Parent Coordinator's office, and in the PTA room. It will also be distributed in letter form to all parents at the beginning of the school year. Possible barriers to the school's ability to address immediate written translation and oral interpretation services may include not having a translator available in a particular language. If this problem occurs, the school would then ask for support and assistance from parent volunteers within the school community or by contacting an over-the-phone interpreter via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of our translation and interpretation services by reviewing data from our annual parent survey, which is translated into several different languages. We review the responses from parents and adjust our translation and interpretation procedures accordingly to meet the needs of our parents. Parents are also asked to discuss their translation and interpretation needs at PTA meetings, parent orientations, and workshops. 2018-19 CEP 67 
