2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q069 School Name: P.S. 069 JACKSON HEIGHTS Principal: MARTHA VAZQUEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Jackson Heights School 30Q069 343000010069 PreK to 5 School Number (DBN): 77-02 37 th Avenue, Jackson Heights, N.Y. 11372 718-424-7700 718-458-6567 Phone Number: Fax: Martha G. Vazquez MVazque11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Martha G. Vazquez Deborah Strack Cregan Nora Bibb Deborah Strack Cregan SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rachel Cabrera n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, 5th Fl. Superintendent’s Office Address: Long Island City, NY 11101 PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 391 8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, N.Y. 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: Ipender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Martha G. Vazquez Deborah Strack Cregan Nora Bibb n/a Rachel Cabrera n/a n/a n/a Paul Alper Rachel Cole Nancy Hill Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Parent Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Kenneth Hughes JoselynBell-McTaggart Thara Madathody Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Many of our students and their families are first generation immigrants from all corners of the world. This represents a challenge as most of our students have learned English as a new language at some point in their lives and we continue to address vocabulary development throughout their school years. As a school community, we are committed to embracing and celebrating the richness of these cultures and their arts experiences while acknowledging our cultural differences. This is reflected in our mission and vision statements: 2018-19 CEP 9  P.S. 69Q VISION The vision of PS 69, a global school community is, with parental support, to prepare students for college, career and lifelong learning while embracing cultural awareness, tolerance, respect and civic responsibility in a safe, healthy and collaborative environment. P.S. 69Q MISSION The mission of the PS 69 community is to provide rigorous and comprehensive instruction that promotes critical thinking and initiative. Our goal is to enable all students to reach their full potential by learning today for the challenges of tomorrow 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 69Q has a large multicultural student and parent population and is proud and celebrates its diversity. Our current enrollment is 966 students of whom approximately 41% are Hispanic/Latino, 49% are Asian, 7% are white, and 2% are multiracial. 20% of our students are Limited English Proficient, 10% are Students with Disabilities, and 41% are economically disadvantaged. There are 24 languages represented in the school. We are a magnet school for Cultural and Performing Arts and have also adopted the schoolwide enrichment model, currently in its 13th year of implementation. We offer multiple opportunities for students to participate in activities that appeal and engage students in their interest areas. Through in-school residency programs and enrichment clusters, students are exposed and participate in rich educational arts based learning. These arts experiences infuse high end learning for all students and engage our higher ability students who need continuous challenge. Enrichment activities encourage creativity, develop thinking skills, and promote cooperativeness, as well as expand their knowledge base, thus motivating and contributing to a positive school experience and environment. Every student in our school receives music instruction as part of their weekly program. Our EaGLE (Early Grade Literacy Enrichment) program provides thematic based literacy cycles of enrichment to our Kindergarten and first grade students. Our Grade 2 students will participate in this year's magnet based enrichment clusters focusing on The Americas. Our fourth and fifth grade students will engage in intergrade cycles of interest-based enrichment of their choice. In partnership with our arts partner, City Lore, Inc., P.S. 69Q is participating in multiple federal and NEA grants that will explore the art, dance and music of The Americas. Numerous classes on each grade from 1 through 5, will participate in these grant opportunities. City Lore will also lead visual arts and dance residency programs for numerous other classes in grades 1 to 5 while providing additional visual arts residencies for select Kindergarten classes. This coming year, P.S. 69Q plans to also continue our successful partnerships with Dancing Classrooms, New Victory Theater, Joyce Theater, and Jazz at Lincoln Center to bring direct arts instruction to our students during the school day. Our students will also have multiple opportunities to participate in afterschool arts instruction through two CASA grants and a Cultural Arts Initiative grant. Cumulatively, these in-school and afterschool programs will ensure that all of our students will receive several enrichment experiences throughout the school year. For many of our English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities, arts based learning and arts based experiences provide these specific student groups the ability to improve self-esteem, gain confidence and acceptance by their peers through their participation and successful involvement in the arts. We have seen again and again that success in the arts translates into greater student achievement, a strong sense of fulfillment and even faster acquisition of language for our ELL and FELL students with a building of background knowledge for our Students With Disabilities. Social emotional development is addressed through our Character Education Program, the Word of the Month, The Sanford Harmony Program, Words of Wisdom, and this year, through Brain Power Wellness. Students participate in "Bully Awareness Week", "Red Ribbon Week," "No-Name Calling Week", “Respect for All Week", and "Random Acts of Kindness Week". Teacher and staff implement common sense, logical, realistic and age appropriate alternative disciplinary strategies as a preventative approach, teaching character and social lessons through literature and specialized lessons, both in the classroom and school wide and using positive reinforcement strategies to encourage 2018-19 CEP 10  appropriate behavior with a goal of developing positive character traits and confidence to improve academic performance. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 20% of our students are English Language Learners, 10% are Students with Disabilities, and 41% are economically disadvantaged. Most students in these subgroups need additional supports to meet academic demands. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of Trust and Strong Family-Community Ties in the Framework for Great Schools are areas of strength reflecting a strong relationship between administrators, teachers, families, and students. Our parents, teachers, and administration work together as partners in the education of our children which is essential to the success of our students. For the upcoming year, our key areas of focus are around Rigorous Instruction to continue to address higher order questioning techniques and discussion techniques while addressing the need to provide differentiated instruction, using tasks with multiple entry points to meet the needs of all learners, including SWD, ELLs, and higher performing students. We will focus our literacy improvement through 'advanced literacy skills' in order to support our students in communicating orally and in writing in diverse ways and for diverse audiences, understand and use print for many purposes, and access and participate in sharing knowledge. We are proud of the successful collaborate community of students, teachers, staff, parents and families that we have created at P.S. 69Q. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q069 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1033 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 37 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 5 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 61.0% % Attendance Rate 58.0% % Reduced Lunch 21.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 40.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 61 95.9% 2.0% 10.6% 0.4% 49.6% 2.7% 4 0% 8.6 60.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In keeping with the Rigorous Instruction element of the Framework for Great Schools to maintain high standards of instruction and expectations, as well as continuing to focus on meeting the needs of all learners (QI 1.2), and after analysis of Running Records results of our Students With Disabilities being the subgroup with the lowest on-grade level proficiency achievement percentage, 3% performing at levels 3 and/or 4, in grades K through 5 at the end of the year, compared to 57% of general education students reading on grade level, we have determined to target our SWD reading skills to strengthen reading achievement and increase proficiency levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of Students With Disabilities in grades Kindergarten through five, will show a 5% increase in achieving reading proficiency, as measured by the TCRWP running records assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Self contained classes in grades K/1, 2, and 3, will use a pacing calendar of units of study from the TCRWP Curriculum to address the individual reading and writing needs of the SWD in those classrooms K/1, 2, and 3rd grade SWD and their teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Four cycles (of 3-4 weeks each cycle) of Professional Learning on Advanced Literacy practices to understand and establish a common set of instructional practices in all SWD classrooms that includes working with engaging texts that feature big ideas and rich content. Special Education teachers Science cluster teachers with SWD September 2018 through May 2019 Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers Assistant Principal, Principal, Literacy Coach, Reading Teacher, Special Education Teachers Every 6 to 8 weeks, Special Education teachers will engage in Professional Development guided by patterns in student data, and connected to the curriculum, in order to build and encourage in-depth learning. Special Education Teachers, Data Specialist,Literacy Coach September 2018 through May 2019 Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, Data Specialist, Special Education Teachers, Weekly Teacher collaboration and planning will support the ongoing implementation of reading instructional strategies, by providing high interest text to students to provide multiple entry points. Special Education teachers, science cluster teachers November 2018 to May 2019 Provide ongoing targeted intervention for SWD in reading during the instructional day using i-Ready and guided reading to advance comprehension with word attack skills and a focus on reading skills and fluency. Teachers will monitor for progress in order to modify and adjust instruction. As an ongoing practice, teachers will use student data, including miscue analysis from first reading assessment, data from conference notes, and student work, to plan reading instruction. SWD and Special Education Teachers Special education teachers Teachers will incorporate technology, including video clips and the use of interactive white boards to facilitate access to the curriculum, provide context and background knowledge, and encourage student engagement in their daily instruction. Special Education teachers, Science cluster teachers September 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through May 2019 Assistant Principal, Principal, Literacy Coach, Enrichment Specialist, Special Education Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Assistant Principal and Principal, Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principals, Technology Teacher 2018-19 CEP 14 Grade level teacher teams will engage in looking at data and collaborating on instructional strategies through cycles of Inquiry. During fall and winter, we will plan and deliver parent workshops on reading aloud, using available educational resources, and understanding developmental milestones, in order to involve, engage, and educate families with the goal of supporting students beyond the school day, All grade level teacher teams; cluster teachers, SETSS teacher Parents/families of SWD. September 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Specialist. Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Technology Teacher, Literacy Coach, Guidance Counselor/School Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Capitalizing on our Strong Family-Community Ties, specifically our Outreach to Parents, parent engagement activities will include parent-teacher meetings during the Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time to discuss progress, parent-teacher conferences, parent workshops to support parents on topics such as reading aloud to their child and how to use available resources to support reading such as A to Z Learning and iReady. Specifically, provide parents of SWD with tools to help help them support their child's learning in order to effectively collaborate and strengthen the connection between home and school which will support their child's reading development and progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Literacy Coach to support teaching practices; ● Assistant Principal and Principal to schedule time for collaboration; ● SETSS Teacher to support families by delivering workshops targeting reading strategies to support students at home ● Data Specialist to support data analysis; . Parent Coordinator to schedule and deliver parent workshops specific for parents of SWD . Special Education teachers and RtI teacher to support parents in addressing their child's needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor TCRWP Running Records assessments of SWD and compare the reading level data to measure if reading levels are moving to the next level as a result of goal related activities and strategies to determine if SWD are on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP assessment running records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Supportive Environment element of the Framework for Great Schools is an area of strength and indicative of a culture where students feel safe, challenged, and supported to meet high expectations. Though our SWD are about 10% of our student population, OORS data reports indicates that SWD make up 46% of the incidents in the school. While most incidents (80%) are Level 3 incidents such as minor altercations or similar confrontational behaviors toward students or school personnel, and the majority during more open, unstructured activity such as recess and physical education, it is indicative of students needing more support self-managing, focusing, and needing to learn strategies that support emotional wellness. Success in managing such behaviors, increasing confidence and a positive attitude, impacts a student's belief that he/she will be successful and result in increased self-esteem and empower students to maximize academic achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Students With Disabilities in grades Kindergarten through five, will have developed a sense of self-efficacy by building confidence and empowering and maximizing their academic and social success as measured by a reduction of 10% of incidents reported in OORS. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As a continuous practice, teachers of SWD will collaborate to develop strategies that increase self-efficacy and positive attitude that can impact on confidence with which SWD approach the content by sharing their professional learning with Brain Power Wellness methods. Teachers of SWD will sustain a focus on building classroom community and confidence by establishing a collaborative learning environment using Brain Power Wellness techniques that support students in engaging in academic rigorous instruction throughout their daily practice. September 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Special Education Teachers Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, SWD Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, SWD Teachers of SWD will promote physical, emotional, and cognitive intelligence through the use of Brain Power Wellness program in order to improve focus and memory, confidence and a positive attitude and increase productivity and learning efficiency for our SWD, in their daily instruction. Guidance Counselor, Teachers of SWD, Cluster teachers Once per week, teachers of SWD will collaborate on ways to integrate Brain Power Wellness stress management tools to ensure social emotional learning as a prevention and intervention strategy to manage stress and anxiety for SWD as they approach a new task. SWD Special Education Teachers, Cluster Teachers, SWD September 2018 through May 2019 Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Special Education Teachers, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor Daily routines will include SWD engaging in team building activities and small group discussions to create a respectful, collaborative environment. Special Education Teachers, September 2018 to June 2019 Special Education Teachers, Assistant Principals SWD 2018-19 CEP 18 Once monthly, from September to December, Special Education teachers and paraprofessionals will research and implement techniques to de-escalate conflict by teaching empathy, intrapersonal awareness, and problem solving to students. Twice during the school year (fall series "Guiding Good Choices" and winter " Brain Power Seminar"), we will provide activities and techniques for parents to use at home to help their child stay healthy and focused, and manage stress thereby creating a harmonious relationship in the family. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, SWD Parents of SWD, Special Education Teachers, September 2018 through December 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Special Education Teachers, Guidance Counselor How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Brain Power Wellness staff developer will work with our Parent Coordinator to schedule a seminar for Parents/families of Students With Disabilities that will help connect school and home activities to help parents with stress management, homework, mindful parenting, positive discipline and proactive communication to help their children stay emotionally healthy and create positive and supportive home interactions that support and reinforce their child's learning experiences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Assistant Principal and Principal to coordinate with parents and staff to assist parents - Parent Coordinator to schedule and deliver parent workshops, including learning and discussing their child's progress with teachers. - Special Education teachers and support personnel (e.g., SETSS teacher, Guidance Counselor) to provide parent engagement activities to help build parent skills and confidence to help in their child's academic development . - Funds for copying informational materials for family workshops; - Schedule workshops for families at varying times to make them accessible to all parents - Parent Coordinator to connect families with community resources, as needed. - Guidance Counselor to connect parents with community services, as needed. - Parent Association to assist with translation services through bilingual parent. - Teacher per session for delivering parent workshops after the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 19  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, School administrators and guidance counselor will meet monthly and review ORSS report data to assess incidents rate of SWD and report on the effectiveness of counseling activities and positive reinforcement strategies in reducing incidents among SWD in order to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ORSS Report - Student Suspect and Recidivist Report for Students with IEP. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, Peer Collaboration, School Commitment, and Innovation and Collective Responsibility are strong areas reflected in in our 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report. Quality of Professional Development has components of relative weakness. An in-house annual survey asking teachers for their individual professional development needs and areas of additional support for school year 2018-2019 indicates that most teachers, across the grades, would like additional professional learning opportunities related to behavior management and health and wellness. Considering that stress is a considerable contributor to teacher burnout, and that anxiety influences student underperformance, professional learning will include effective stress management tools to ensure an optimal mindset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Special Education teachers and teachers with SWD in their classrooms, including cluster teachers, will participate in professional development/professional learning opportunities focusing on behavior management and stress management techniques that support student learning and result in an overall increase of 3%age points in student performance in English Language Arts/Reading as measured by TCRWP running records assessment. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PL Team Leader will facilitate monthly PL meetings for teachers of SWD and lead the collaborative planning process with a focus on planning, implementing, and reinforcing hands-on exercises and activities in the classroom. Teachers of SWD in grades K to 5 will participate in 4 professional development sessions provided by Brain Power Wellness (September through December) to learn strategies to reduce stress and manage behaviors of SWD. PL Team Leader, Special Education Teachers. Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals Teachers of SWD in grades K to 5 will participate in 3 "Classroom Visits" every 6-8 weeks, through the Brain Power Wellness Program to follow up on activities learned as well as principles of mindfulness and stress management used in the classroom. K to 5 Special Education Teachers Grade level Assistant Principals and Principal will ensure that common planning time is scheduled in the teacher’s weekly programs. Grade level teacher teams. After grade level unit planning (as per the pacing calendar), teachers of SWD will refine instruction using strategies and activities as a way to differentiate for their students and achieve goals of improved memory and focus, confidence, and positive attitude. All special education teachers Special Education Teacher team will engage in monthly collaborative Professional Learning meetings related to student's needs and based on student data. Special Education Teacher Teams. Special Education Teacher team will engage in monthly interactive collaboration, including time for reflection, and with actionable take-aways. focusing on building positive social-emotional behaviors for their students. Special Education Teacher Team, Literacy Coach September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through December 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 20178 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 PL Team Leader, Assistant Principals, Principal. Assistant Principals, Principal, Special Education Teachers Assistant Principals, Principal, Special Education Teachers. Assistant Principals, Principal. Grade level leaders , Assistant Principals, Principal, Special Education teachers. October 2018 through May 2019 November 2018 through April 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach/Data Specialist. Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The NYC School Survey score of 4.02 in the Strong Family-Community Ties element of the Framework For Great Schools is indicative of parent satisfaction in our outreach efforts and parental involvement opportunities. In addition, we earned a Well Developed rating in our Quality Review indicator measuring how effectively our school partners with families to support student success. In order to increase parent participation in their child's education, we will provide families of SWD with information and techniques that will support their child's learning as well as the child's healthy development. We will do this by providing parents/guardians with workshops to support their understanding of their child's curriculum and resources available to support their child's learning, as well as how to work and collaborate with their child's teachers to enhance their child's performance. Parents will also be invited to classroom celebrations, school events, and parent-teacher conferences. Our Parent Coordinator and the Principal will collaborate on scheduling, recruiting and encouraging parents to participate, and evaluating the effectiveness of the workshops as well as monitoring parent participation through attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.   Literacy Coach to support teacher practices Special Education teachers to facilitate professional learning for teachers and parent workshops on behavior strategies/management.  4 Professional Development sessions through Brain Power Wellness focusing on mindfulness practices, social emotional wellness strategies for teachers.  Parent Coordinator to schedule and deliver parent workshops in the home language or using an interpreter.  Mental Health Consultant as a resource to deliver stress management workshops for teachers and parents.  Parent Association to provide interpreters and donations (i.e., refreshments, volunteers) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, school administrators will meet monthly to report on the effectiveness of stress management techniques used during the instructional day to maximize student learning and cultivate a nurturing and positive learning environment for SWD, in order to achieve learning efficiency and time on task and maximize academic success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The element of Effective School Leadership in the Framework for Great schools is an area of strength indicating that the professional growth and development of teachers is nurtured and instructional and social-emotional development supports and drives student achievement as evidenced by 64% of all students achieving proficiency in State ELA tests. However, only 13% of our SWD in grades 3-5 are at proficiency level in ELA. Our SWD will be the focus for our goal in this area. Current data is also indicative of significant differences between the ELA achievement proficiency of our Asian students (72.5%) and Hispanic students (50.5%) in ELA and in Math 74.8% achievement proficiency of Asian students and 39.4% achievement proficiency of Hispanic students. Additionally, relative to the element of Effective School Leadership and as measured by NYC School Survey, 48% of teachers feel that they do not have much influence in the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms, only 69% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials, and 69% of teachers say that they have influence over standards of student behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and teacher leaders will collaborate to strategically set goals towards the achievement of student progress in meeting the Next Generation Standards as measured by a 2% gain in the performance of SWD index in Adequate Yearly Progress. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In September, create a committee of teacher leaders and administrators with the goal of collaborating, communicating , and aligning learning protocols, including adaptations to lessons for particular groups (i.e., SWD) to support consistent implementation. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, Literacy Coach Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teacher leaders, Literacy Coach Schedule meetings with Special Education Teachers every six weeks, or more frequently if needed, to facilitate horizontal and vertical communication between administrators and teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals, September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach/Data Specialist Teacher Leaders, Literacy Coach Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 October 2018 through May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, Advanced Literacy Committee members Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, Literacy Coach Throughout the school year, build a culture that encourages communication and feedback among and between administrators and teachers to design a set of school-wide protocols for learning that are authentic, directed, flexible, and useful. During the Advance Literacy PL cycles, administrators and teacher leaders will engage in collaboration to align aspects of Advanced Literacy such as comprehending text, discussing text, etc., to practices that effect student achievement/progress. Special Education Teacher team , including Science cluster teachers, will collaborate on identifying texts in multiple levels of difficulty at their grade level during cycles of Monday professional learning time. 2018-19 CEP 25 At each Professional Learning session, educators will share thoughts, discuss perspectives, and raise questions so that participants acquire new knowledge, reflect on ideas with colleagues, give feedback , yielding highly interactive and engaging PL sessions. Teachers will integrate texts and activities in their daily lessons by building in intentional interactions to support students in the development and understanding of a topic, to develop reading comprehension skills. October 2018 through May 2019 October 2018 through May 2019 Advanced Literacies Facilitators, Special Education Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, Advanced Literacy Committee Leader. Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level Assistant Principals will ensure monthly communication to parents/guardians of the high utility vocabulary being implemented on the grade via the already established unit literacy letters to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning time in all teacher programs; Schedule Professional Learning Mondays purposefully for formal collaboration; Advanced Literacy Committee members to help facilitate and provide opportunities for teachers to share and give feedback; Special Education teachers to provide PD supports (e.g., strategies to build reading fluency for SWD, questioning to develop higher order thinking skills); Support the acquisition and/or accessibility of materials necessary for meeting the needs of students (e.g., reading materials at independent reading level of student, multiple text at different reading levels) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  By the end of February 2019, administrators will monitor SWD reading progress after each assessment cycle to compare reading levels and determine if students are moving up levels as a result of related activities and determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Family engagement and communication are areas of strength relative to the Framework for Great Schools. 91% of our parents/guardians are satisfied with the level of Parent Involvement in our school, and 96% of our parents/guardians indicate satisfaction with our Outreach to Parents as measured by the NYC School Survey. This yields a score of 4.02 in the Strong Family-Community Ties element of the Framework For Great Schools and is further supported by a Well Developed rating in our Quality Review indicator measuring how effectively our school partners with families to support student success. We recognize the benefits of establishing strong partnerships with parents to support student learning. Strong communication builds a sense of community between home and school, and supports student success through collaboration. To continue to develop and expand our communication with parents it is important to communicate with parents on a regular, meaningful, and effective manner. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the parents of SWD will collaborate in school-home partnership to ensure that students and families are engaged in activities that support social-emotional growth as measured by 30% of parents of SWD's attendance to parent workshops, classroom celebrations, and PTC meetings. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent workshops during the day as well as during Tuesday Parent Engagement time to support parents of SWD in raising a healthy, well adjusted to school and community child, as well as workshops on available resources to support their child at home. Parents of SWD Provide parents of SWD with frequent communications, in their home language, through classroom celebrations, newsletters, calendars, events, individual parent-teacher conferences to discuss student progress. In September/October, provide training for teachers and staff on meaningful communications and collaboration with families, with particular attention to parents/families of SWD. Kindergarten to grade 5 teachers of SWD, Parents of SWD Teachers of SWD, Paraprofessionals, Support staff such as counselor, RtI teachers, etc. Outreach to parents of SWD beginning in September and throughout the school year, through use of their preferred language, to welcome parents, provide information about the school and curriculum, provide information about the teacher/school expectations, and providing translated written communications. Kindergarten to grade 5 special education teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parents of SWD September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 October 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 On an ongoing basis, use communication tools such as ClassDojo to engage parents of SWD in monitoring their child's progress. In September/October/November, deliver parent workshop to communicate and inform parents of SWD about how they can become involved in their child's education (e.g., homework support, reading, story telling, taking child to library, trips, etc.) K to 5 Special Education teachers, parents of SWD September 2018 through June 2019 K to 5 special education teachers, parents of SWD, September 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator, BPW Facilitator, Mental Health Liaison Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, SETSS, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Social Worker from Child Center of NY will deliver workshops in Bengali for Bengali speaking parents. Thrive NYC - Mental Health Counselor will deliver workshops to parents in topics such as Autism, healthy relationships, and child development. Brain Power Wellness - deliver a preant workshop on techniques to manage stress and creating a harmonious relationship within the family. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator to schedule workshops with CBOs as well as school based workshops, and host parent sessions Special Education Teachers to provide workshops to parents of SWD. Technology Teacher to provide workshop to parents on using on-line/school resources to support learning Parent Workshops scheduled during the day, Tuesday Parent Engagement time, and evenings to accommodate all parents Parent Association volunteers to support with translations and support to parents as a resource Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, administration and Parent Coordinator will meet monthly to report on the attendance of parents to parent workshops and review parent feedback of the goal related activities and determine if the school is on course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Signed attendance records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading below level 2 on benchmark reading levels/assessments Mathematics Performing below grade level on assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Individual or small group Small group instruction delivered by Services are provided during the strategy lessons based on identified needs. Individual or small group Reading Push-in teacher to all level 1 and low level 2 third grade students as well as on flexible duration based on need. One Enrichment/Intervention teacher and paraprofessional provides cycles of instruction to K and 1 students in literacy. Small group instruction delivered by school day, during the literacy periods. Enrichment/ Intervention cycles are provided during the day. Services are provided during the strategy lessons/ conferences Classroom teachers during the school day, during the math periods . based on identified needs. math periods to level 1 and 2 students as well as on flexible duration based on need, to grades 3,4,5 students. ESL push in teachers push in to grade 3 classrooms during their available periods. 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Performing below grade level on assessments. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Performing below grade level on classroom assessments. Family history that impacts school performance (e.g., violence, divorce, illness, etc.); history of difficulty adjusting and complying with school rules. Poor attendance and/or punctuality record. Differentiated instruction based Small group instruction provided by Services are provided during the on student’s needs. Technology based instruction at the student’s level. Differentiated instruction based classroom teacher during the science period. Technology based programs to individualize instruction. ELL students may have the services of an ESL push-in teacher to provide small group instruction with ESL strategies. Small group instruction provided by school day, during the science periods. Services are provided during the on student’s needs, including hands-on investigation. classroom teacher during the social studies period. school day, during the social Studies periods Individual or group counseling as needed. Guidance Counselor provides Services are provided during the services for students on individual school day. basis and forms groups based on commonalities. Guidance Counselor also plans and conducts schoolwide prevention activities in topics related to Respect For All initiatives, Character Education, etc. SAPIS counselor provides services 2018-19 CEP 32  for students at risk in small group. At risk services provided by School Nurse on an individual basis, as needed. School nurse also schedules two groups of students for a cycle each to address asthma education. In addition, Healthy Options Program is provided depending on the recommendations of FitnessGram assessment. At risk counseling services provides on an individual basis by school Psychologist and Social Worker. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) P.S. 69 currently has eight (8) STH 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Reading push-in teacher to provide intervention services as needed; Math intervention in small group; Guidance Counselor's services in small group or individual counseling; Providing school materials (such as school uniform, supplies, playing for class trips, etc.) Coordinating OPT services if needed/available Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As needed, we recruit highly qualified teachers through reviewing resumes received in response to open posted vacancies which are reviewed by a personnel committee. We also receive resumes throughout the year and review them as vacancies open. In addition, we review resources such as New Teacher Finder and seek out candidates whose credentials indicate that they are highly qualified. Administrative staff is also aware of hiring fairs to identify highly qualified teachers. P.S. 69 attracts many applicants due to its special academic programs which include enrichment clusters, cultural studies, arts, and technology, as well as professional development opportunities and support offered to our teachers. In addition, mentors, grade leaders, and buddy teachers are assigned to support new teachers, teachers new to a grade, and/or teachers in need of support. Literacy Coach provides instructional support and professional development on an ongoing basis to teachers and to individual teachers as needed. This includes modeling instructional best practices, mentoring, and demonstration lessons to improve instruction. Teachers also attend professional learning provided by the DOE as well as our Support Center. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional Learning Team meets monthly to plan high quality professional learning for all teachers and paraprofessionals. ● Teacher surveys inform differentiated professional learning opportunities based on teacher/paraprofessional’s areas of interest. ● Advance data and observations inform professional learning opportunities. ● School leaders participate in professional learning at the school as well as provided by support center. ● Music and Art Cluster teachers will attend related Professional Development provided by the DOE. ● Literacy Coach will attend the sessions of professional learning offered by the DOE and/or Support Center related to curriculum, DOK, student feedback. 2018-19 CEP 36  ● K to 5 teachers will participate in the curriculum development and planning related to TC Curriculum and ReadyGen units of study ● Teacher teams will focus on planning lessons and units and strengthening teaching practice.  Advanced Literacy Team will facilitate PD that is ongoing and connected to the curriculum.  School administrators will provide support to teachers through frequent classroom visits, actionable feedback, coaching,, and professional learning aligned to Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Next Generation Standards , and other content standards.  Teachers will turnkey their learning in the new science curriculum - Amplify.  A Core team of 10-12 teachers will be trained and become school mentors in Brain Power Wellness social-emotional program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Kindergarten teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals, and Parent Coordinator, meet with all parents and students who are entering Kindergarten for the upcoming school year. The parents are given a tour of the school by the Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Social Worker, School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, and teachers. Parent workshops addressing the topics of skills needed to enter kindergarten, the transition to Kindergarten, and the CCLS are offered for PreK parents. The IEP teacher meets with all incoming special education parents during registration to ensure that services will be provided from the first day of school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 37  Classroom teachers devised a task for each writing unit of study to be able to assess all students’ strengths and weaknesses within the writing CCLS. The teachers also decided to use the Teachers College Writing Continuum to assess the student’s On Demand writing as well as the final task to close the gaps within the individual student’s learning. K to grade 2 Literacy Coach provides the professional development for the use of the Writing Continuum. Classroom teachers devised a task for each critical area in math to be able to assess all students’ strengths and weaknesses within the math CCLS. These critical areas enable the teachers to close the gaps within the individual student’s learning. Literacy Coach participates in the Periodic Assessment Selection Webinar in order to inform teachers of the assessment tools available in 2018-19 school year. Assistant Principals, Principal, Literacy Coach, and teachers review available Periodic Assessment selections. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sec. 5A -Part 4b x x Sec. 5B - Part 4b Sec. 5C - Part 4b Sec. 5D - Part 4b Sec. 5E - Part 4b Sec. 5A -Part 4b Sec. 5B - Part 4b Sec. 5C - Part 4b Sec. 5D - Part 4b Sec. 5E - Part 4b Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 390,286 Title II, Part A Federal 76,679 2018-19 CEP 38  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5,457,739 n/a n/a x n/a n/a Sec. 5A -Part 4b Sec. 5B - Part 4b Sec. 5C - Part 4b Sec. 5D - Part 4b Sec. 5E - Part 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 39  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 69 Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 69Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 42  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 69Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 44  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 80 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 4 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: An analysis of the State ELA results indicates that our third grade ELL students had most difficulty with questions requiring word meaning and inferring main idea. Our fourth grade ELLs also had most difficulty inferring word meaning, as well as inferring overall structure, and interpreting information. Our fifth grade ELLs also had most difficulty with word meaning and identifying the theme. In order to address the needs of our ELLs, P.S. 69's Title III program will provide our English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in English, through an after school program. The instructional program will service ELLs in grades 2 to 5 who scored on the Entering/Emerging, and/or Transitioning/Expanding levels, in that priority order, on the NYSESLAT and include any ELL with interrupted formal education. The after school classes will meet for 31 sessions after the school day ends, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 2:45p.m. to 4:15 p.m. (1.50 hours) beginning on December 20, and ending on April 18, 2019. Approximately 80 ELL students will be in small classes of no more than 20 students per class/teacher to ensure that students will get individualized attention to meet their needs. Students will be further grouped in order to differentiate instruction. Students will be further supported through the use of their home language to scaffold instruction and use of a buddy for native language support. Students will be invited to this program primarily based on teacher recommendations keeping in mind the previously noted priority order. Letters will be sent home in the parents home language, when possible, explaining the goals of the program as well as the duration and schedules for the program. The focus of literacy instruction will be on reading and writing to accelerate English language literacy development and prepare students for success in the academic setting as well as succeed in the state assessments. Four (4) certified ENL teachers, who also hold their Common Branches certification, will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the literacy curriculum using ENL methodologies to help students achieve higher levels of academic development emphasizing academic language development in the content areas while focusing on nonfiction, informational reading and writing using text evidence and vocabulary in context. Mathematics instruction will be a component during the latter part of the program and will target students who are below grade proficiency. A supervisor/administrator will be paid per session (not charged to Title III funding) to oversee the program at 30Q069. Program supervisor will maintain records including students recommended for the program, students selected for the program, and student attendance, as well as teacher training attendance and agendas. Supplemental materials, which are not used during the regular instructional day, will be used as follows: 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Continental's NY ELLs for grades 2, 3, and 5 which addresses the speaking, listening, reading, and writing language domains and focuses on academic content and items for the Common Core’s emphasis on reading for information. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT for grade 4, which addresses speaking, listening, reading including short passages for comprehension, and writing descriptive paragraphs and fact-based essays. Technology resources to individualize instruction, small group instruction, as well as address ENL skills, and provide literacy support will be utilized using interactive programs such as BrainPop ESL, MyOn, and Reading A - Z. With the exception of BrainPop ESL, these programs will be made available to the students during the afterschool program at no cost to Title III. iReady will be used to differentiate reading and mathematics instruction. This program includes a diagnostic tool, delivers instruction according to ability and provides progress reports based on the Common Core Learning Standards. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Based on data gathered from Running Records and On-demand Writing assessments, we have determined that the writing skills of many ENL students need to be developed. A series of three workshops will focus on the process of writing in a range of genres and strategies and ideas to make the writing process explicit to ELLs. P.S. 69's professional development for Title III teachers will include one workshop on addressing the individual reading needs of students ("Using iReady for Instruction"). This workshop will focus on integrating data into the individualized instruction for students with the goal of increased student engagement and student growth. The second workshop will focus on scaffolding strategies for ELL students ('Scaffolding Strategies to Support Reading and Writing for ELLs"), which will prepare teachers to help ELLs succeed in school by teaching ELLs to read using Shared Reading with carefully selected and/or prepared enlarged texts and demonstrating key concepts. Emphasis will be on text based conversations and evidence based arguments with writing to assess comprehension of the text. Follow up with books on the students reading level will individualize instruction and provide opportunities for independent reading. The program will also address building up a sight word vocabulary which gives many advantages to ENL learners since many of the sight words on Dolch’s lists not only occur frequently in children’s stories, but also in daily conversations; teaching letter-sound relationships to provide a good foundation between spoken and written English. The third workshop, "Building Mathematics Vocabulary Through Discussion and Application," will address mathematics and developing mathematics specific academic vocabulary (content vocabulary) to move ELLs along the language development continuum. The four (4) participating teachers will participate in each two hour session which will be conducted on Fridays, from 2:40 p.m. to 4:40 p.m., before and during the Title III program (first one will be on December 7th, the second on January 4th , and the third workshops will be on January 25th). Each workshop will be two (2) hours in duration and will be facilitated by one of our ENL Push-in Teachers (Ms. I. Vavro, and/or Ms. H. Zias) who service students during daily instruction but do not teach in the supplemental program. In addition, teachers participate in workshops focusing on ENL methodologies and participate in 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development cycles of professional learning (Mondays) focusing on the language and math needs identified in the data of ELL students (at no cost to Title III). Professional development agendas and attendance will be maintained by the program supervisor. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of our ENL students are invited to workshops during the school day as well as after school. Based on previous participation and expressed needs of Bengali speaking parents of ELL students, parents are invited to participate in a series of four workshops provided by a Bengali speaking social worker. The topics include positive parenting, adjustment to school and community, anger management, and child mental health. A workshop on resources to support literacy at home will also be provided by our Technology Teacher, Ms. Mucci, during a Tuesday, Parent Engagement session, in January (at no cost to the Title III program). Considering limited participation of ELL parents in past workshops, our Parent Coordinator will offer a workshop with language translation in February, during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time, to help parents set up NYC School Accounts and help parents navigate and stay informed in their child's education (at no cost to the Title III program). In the spring, parents of ENL students will be invited to attend a workshop focusing on understanding the NYSESLAT (at no cost to the Title III program). This workshop is conducted with language translation and has been well attended in past years. This workshop will be conducted in March , also on a Tuesday, from 2:40 to 4:00 p.m. Ms. Vavro and/or Ms. Zias, ENL Teachers, will be the workshop facilitators. Parents of ELL students will also be invited to participate in a parent workshop to understand the State ELA and Mathematics exams (at no cost to the Title III program). Parents of ELL students have expressed concerns and considered refusing State exams in the past, therefore, this workshop aims to reduce anxiety and inform parents of the importance of the test to the students' educational program. This workshop will be offered during the school day and facilitated by a school administrator and teachers, including ENL teachers. This workshop will teach parents about resources that encourage students, address the mathematics strands, and recommends a work plan and activities for each student. Translators are available during workshops in our most spoken languages which are Spanish and Bengali. In addition, in order to expose parents of ELLs to community activities and opportunities in the community, a parent and child trip is planned to a community cultural event. A Friday evening or Saturday trip will be planned in the spring (April or May) for approximately 40 parents and their children accompanied by three (3) teachers in order to guide small group activities (this will be charged to the Title III Parent Engagement set aside of 10% of the budget). This type of activity supports student learning in relation to our ongoing emphasis on multicultural awareness and celebration. Workshops and activities such as the parent and child trip are advertised via backpack flyer to ELL students and the flyer will be translated to the parent's home language where possible. Records of parent participation (attendance sheet) and agenda/handouts will be maintained on file by the program's supervisor. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name P.S. 69, THE JACKSON HEIGHTS SCHOOL Borough Queens School Number 069 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Martha Vazquez Coach Sandra Valdivia ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Isabel Vavro Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area Helen Zias/ENL Related-Service Provider Zuly Mejia Superintendent Dr. P. Composto Assistant Principal Jo Ann Lyons Coach n/a School Counselor Julie Ferrara Parent Azmeri Rahaman Parent Coordinator Marina Mrazovic Field Support Center Staff Member Evelyn Mosquea Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 8 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1030 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 219 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.26%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, NYC/ELA Performance Tasks, ReadyGen Performance Base Assessment (PBA) and Go Math Units of Study, TCRWP, Wilson Reading Fundations, and classroom teacher assessments and observations to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students. Approximately 34 percent (%) of our 2014-2015 ELL population reached proficiency on the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT. The percentage of proficient ELLs is lower/70% than previous years. We attribute this decline in students reaching proficiency due to the examination changes that align with the CCLS, which includes more rigorous content and academic language on the test than previous years. The majority of our ELLs fall within the Expanding level of proficiency. This data has helped inform our school's instructional plan by adopting ReadyGen to meet the rigor expected in following the CCLS, as well as providing Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions, differentiated instruction, and small group instruction to help our ELLs close the gap in reaching grade level standards and proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 53  At our school we have several structures to support this effort. We have an RTI (Response to Intervention) teacher who provides intervention to struggling learners. RTI is an early intervention that is matched to students' needs and the monitoring of progress is continuous. We also maintain a literacy coach who provides support to classroom teachers by hosting professional learning sessions, and supporting them in implementing various instructional programs and practices. Our IEP teacher modifies the general curriculum to meet the needs of the ENL/SWD learner and provides supplementary aids and services that the learner may need to be successful in the classroom. Our ENL teachers work with small groups of English language learners within the mainstream classroom and make the curriculum accessible by employing ENL methodology. Finally, our reading specialist works with students in grades 3-5 who are functioning far below grade level based on either their Fountas & Pinnell level, or their score on the state ELA reading exam. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our program by looking at the progress achieved by ELLs each year. We look at reading levels as determined by the TCRWP Assessments, as well as NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results. Also, Performance Base Assessments (PBA) are used across the grades to mark progress. In grades K-2, we administer the ELA NYC Performance Task; in grades 3-5 the ELA Benchmarks are administered, as well as the Go Math Chapter Tests, and the End of the Year Assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We utilize RTI to help students. The RTI teacher utilizes the 3 Tier Model which includes academic, as well as behavioral intervention. The special education teacher provides services specially designed and / or supplemental instruction to support students with disabilities in the general education classroom by consulting the students' general education teacher. We have a Title I reading teacher who identifies students based on their reading level or ELA score who are performing below grade level, based on Fountas and Pinell, or who have scored a Level 1 on the ELA. The ENL teachers service students who have not yet scored at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT or who have scored Commanding for 2 years after they have attained this level. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 69Q uses the following data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework for grades K-5: • NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores • NYS ELA, Math, and Science scores • NYC Performance Asessments, Fall and Spring • Units of study assessements related to ReadyGen and Go Math • Running Records • Teacher created assessments and observations The RTI framework that our school uses to guide instruction for our ELLs is a 3 tier approach. The first tier of intervention begins using high quality evidence-based instruction, differentiated instruction, and ELL centered instruction and strategies that provide academic language development and increased proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing. If ELL students, who are not newcomers, demonstrate below grade level proficiency on many of the assessment mentioned above, then struggling ELLs will be considered for Tier 2 for more targeted and intensive academic support. If after a period of time a student does not show significant improvement on assessments while on Tier 2, then the ELL student may be recommended for Tier 3 to further tailor instruction related to the language and learning needs of that student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 54  To be updated when new data for current academic year become available. Data patterns across proficiency levels After examining the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT results in the overall proficiency levels, we have noted the following pattern: • approximately 34% of our 2014-2015 ELL population who took the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT reached proficiency (commanding) • approximately 52% of our 2014-2015 ELLs who took the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT are at the expanding level • 6% of our 2014-2015 ELLs who took the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT are at the transitioning level • 8% of our 2014-2015 ELLs who took the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT are at the entering/emerging level Percentage of Kindergarten ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 28% Expanding: 68% Transitioning: 2% Entering/Emerging: 2% Percentage of First Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 40% Expanding: 44% Transitioning: 8% Entering/Emerging 8% Percentage of Second Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 44% Expanding: 41% Transitioning: 5% Entering/Emerging: 10% Percentage of Third Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 10% Expanding: 57% Transitioning: 19% Entering/Emerging: 14% Percentage of Fourth Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 27% Expanding: 58% Transitioning: 6% Entering/Emerging: 9% Percentage of Fifth Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 44% Expanding: 44% Transitioning: 3% Entering/Emerging: 9% Approximately 34% of our 2014-2015 ELL population reached proficiency on he Spring 2015 NYSESLAT. The majority of the ELLs who reached proficiency were in the second and fifth Grade. The majority of our ELLs, almost half of our ELL population, are at the Expanding level. We attribute this success to effective classroom teaching, differentiated instruction, and careful instructional planning based on data analysis. We also credit this positive outcome to the majority of these ELL students' participation in supplemental ENL after-school enrichment classes. This additional learning in their school day helped these ELLs to progress at a more rapid rate in learning English language skills. The percentage of ELLs who were at the beginning and intermediate stages are mainly ELLs who are newcomers or struggling students. To help increase their proficiency for 2015-16, we will provide these students with RTI or AIS, and afterschool program support. 2018-19 CEP 55  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At PS 69 we have self- contained ENL class placement on each grade in order to facilitate ENL push-in or self-contained support. The teachers modify instruction by grouping students either by their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL level. ENL teachers also attend professional learning sessions throughout the year and meet with push-in teachers to recommend students for additional supports, if needed. Push-in Math and ELA teachers also participate in professional learning and Inquiry sessions where student data is discussed and next steps are evaluated. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S.69Q has a variety of organizational models to deliver ENL instruction. We offer self-contained model where ELLs are grouped together for the entire school year for all content instruction; the push-in model where certified ENL teachers work with a group of ELLs in collaboration with regular classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support in the content area and pull-out model where fully certified ESL teachers pull out individual students to accommodate their special needs. ELLs who scored at ENTERING or EMERGING levels are placed in self-contained classes for the entire school year and for all content instruction. They receive the mandated 360 minutes of ENL instruction. ELLs who achieved TRANSITIONING or EXPANDING levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and are placed in monolingual classes and serviced by a fully certified ENL push-in teacher for the entire school year. COMMANDING ELLs with less than two years of exiting of the program also receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL instruction. Delivery of instruction Our school employs an English as New Language with Native Language Support Program. All ELL students, some former ELL students (those needing additional support), and alternate placement and Special Education students, are for the most part, either in a self-contained ENL class or are serviced by a push-in/pull-out ENL teacher. Nine teachers are certified English as a Second Language teachers. In Kindergarten through third grade classes, ELLs are generally placed in self-contained ENL classes. In grades 4 and 5, students are placed in monolingual classes and a push-in/pull out teacher delivers ENL instruction/services to the students. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? a. Students in our freestanding ENL programs receive all instruction in English with native language support, such as glossaries, dictionaries, and materials in the home language. School personnel are also available to provide support to the struggling students during the school day. The number of ENL instructional units that a student receives is regulated by New York State CR Part 154 regulations and determined by student's English-proficiency level (as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores). Students are serviced in self-contained ENL classes as well as by the push-in/pull-out certified 2018-19 CEP 56  ENL teachers who provide the mandated numbers of instructional minutes. All ENTERING/EMERGING students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and TRANSITIONING/EXPANDING students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Former ELLs (COMMANDING) receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, various scaffolds are used to deliver content area instruction. Our teachers scaffold and differentiate instruction in order to meet the needs of the students. Instructional techniques such as modeling, demonstration, guided practice, word walls, hands-on activities, small group instruction, regular feedback on students' work, visuals and realia for new vocabulary, think alouds, and activating prior knowledge, are regularly used to address the student's language needs. - Modeling- includes teacher/students doing a required task together first, or providing students with an exemplar piece from another student. - Bridging- connects new concepts and language with previous knowledge, a necessary component of all learning. Bridging occurs when students are asked to activate their prior knowledge in anticipation of learning new information and when personal links are made between the new subject matter and students’ knowledge and experience. - Contextualization of new concepts and language — often decontextualized in textbooks by embedding the new language in sensory experiences using realia, manipulatives, graphic representation, and verbal analogies familiar to students — help make language clear. - Schema building- develops understanding by helping students weave new information into pre-existing structures of meaning, a necessary component in organizing knowledge and understanding. Schema building can include previewing a text with students and using an advance organizer in preparation for a reading assignment or brief lecture. - Text Re-presentation- is the recreation of concepts and language from one genre into another. In representing information from an article in a poster or play, students can access content presented in a more difficult genre as they transform it into an easier genre to produce. Examples of text representation include asking students to transform scientific content into a friendly letter to a peer or family member, or changing a poem into a narrative, or a narrative into a play. - Metacognition - involves the learner stepping beyond the experience to reflect on the processes involved. It includes consciously applying strategies while engaging in an activity; knowledge and awareness of strategic options and the ability to choose an effective option; and, monitoring and adjusting during performance and planning for a future performance based on prior performance of an activity. Examples of strategies used include: think aloud, KWL, thinking maps, and various graphic organizers. - Embedding academic language by using pictures, manipulatives, images ,and authentic objects (realia) in order to ensure that academic language is optimized through sensory learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newly admitted ELLs whose native language is Spanish are given the Spanish Lab upon their arrival. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. When SIFE students are identified, our instructional plan is to differentiate instruction within ELL subgroups. Differentiated instruction, scaffolding and explicit teaching of academic language are effective strategies used with them. There is ongoing assessment to address their needs. There is also ongoing communication between the Parent Coordinator and the parents of these children. NCLB requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year. A Title III program is offered and includes a component focusing on literacy and test prep skills for state tests. 2018-19 CEP 57  b. ELL students in U.S. schools for less than three years (newcomers) are usually placed in self-contained ENL classes, receive small group instruction, and are invited to attend the Title III after school program. Our self-contained classes make use of glossaries and dictionaries in a student’s native language. The buddy system is also implemented if speakers of the same language are available. c. ELL students in a US school who are receiving services for 4-6 years are placed in a monolingual class or self-contained ENL class depending on their ENL proficiency. If they are in a monolingual class, they are serviced by a push-in ENL teacher and receive the required minutes of ENL instruction per week. In addition, students who exhibit inadequate growth in reading assessments receive 45 minutes per day in literacy instruction, using reading intervention to help the student(s) achieve grade level proficiency in reading, and including test taking strategies, from our Title I Reading teacher. d. Long term ELLS are identified from CR Part 154 (A-11) roster. These students are given formal assessments such as State ELA Test, State Math Test, Science and NYSESLAT. They are also informally assessed with teacher made assessments, observations, reading and writing assessments. Teachers use the data from these assessments to determine progress, to guide their instruction, group students, and plan individualized instruction to address the needs of the student. ELLS are also taught using ESL methodologies in content areas in order to build academic language. Our self-contained classes use glossaries and dictionaries in their native language. We also pair students with a buddy of the same native language when possible. e. Our plan for former ELLS includes giving them a mandated 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL instruction in ELA, Math, Science, or Social Studies. They receive testing modifications in the form of extra time on state exams. NCLB requires ELA testing for ELL students after one year. Our Tittle III program supplements our students' needs in test taking skills, language and vocabulary development. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies used to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate the English language development of ELL-SWD are: - Using nonverbal cues such as gestures, facial expressions and body language to convey information. - Using graphic organizers, pictures, images on on iPad, drawings, or bringing to classroom real objects (realia). - Modeling and demonstrating procedures more than once. - Use of wait time to allow students to process information. - Scaffolding of complex sentences by breaking them down. - Using technology such as audio or videos. Presenting essential information to address all learning styles: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, tactual. - Use of charts to organize reading strategies such as Main Idea, Character Traits, Story Maps, Semantic Webs, Compare/Contrast. - Also our school staff has been trained in the use of Thinking Maps as a new way to present and organize information and help construct knowledge. These strategies are utilized by ENL and Special Education teachers for instruction in all content areas, using the appropriate grade level materials in our curriculum: TCRWP, ReadyGen, GoMath, Skills Building Instruction, Social Studies, and Science. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to enable our diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEPgoals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by: - Flexibly pairing and grouping students. - Grouping students based on NYSESLAT data/levels. - Modifying or adjusting the curriculum to accommodate individual needs. 2018-19 CEP 58  - Connecting skills and concepts in all content areas. - Customizing instruction based on individual IEPs and knowledge of students. - Differentiating instruction to accommodate students' needs. - Conducting activities on Promethean boards. - Introducing vocabulary to make text accessible. - Scaffolding and repetition of information using less complex sentences. - Use of multimedia presentations to teach the curriculum. - Modeling and demonstration to differentiate instruction. - Testing Modifications during all tests. Flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers. SWD are also mainstreamed when appropriate and Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes are also formed. Through this model, students with disabilities and non-disabled students are taught together by two teachers: a general education teacher, and a special education teacher. The teachers work together and collaborate throughout the day to adapt and modify instruction for the students, ensuring that all students have access to the general education curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have intervention services for ELLS in the different content areas. Our Push-in ENL teachers provide services in literacy, math, as well as in the content areas for all ENL students. These services are provided to ELLs of all proficiency levels, as well as Special Ed ELLS. The ENL teacher may push-in during content areas such as math, science, social studies, and ELA to provide support for students in small groups. Wilson Fundations and iReady are used for ELA targeted intervention for ELL students. In addition, Title I Reading Specialist teacher push-in to service ELL/FELL students in small group. Title III after school programs addresses ELA and Math and it is offered to all levels of ELL students. Summer enrichment program is also offered through Title III. Based on the classroom teacher's recommendations, a student's progress is reviewed by the IEP teacher, grade supervisor, intervention teacher, and recommendations for additional interventions are made including one to one instruction to address the needs of the student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As of this time, there are no new programs that will be implemented. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As of this time no programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. All the ELL students in our school participate in strong, coherent programs that are uniformly delivered throughout the city. All the ENL self-contained classes follow the same standards and same curricula as the regular classes. ELLS in regular classes are serviced by certified ENL teachers as required by CR-Part 154. Supplemental ENL instruction is offered through our after school Title III program. All programs and activities are available to all students including ELLS. For example, we have had a CASA program which offers arts opportunities through theater productions and our ELL students participate equally. Our ELL students participate in our enrichment cycles among monolingual students as well as any and all activities offered at our school. Translated written versions of state tests are available. Oral translators are hired for lower incidence languages to translate the state tests in content areas. Paraprofessionals who speak other languages are also utilized to assist in translations with students and their parents. In grade 2-5, ELLS are invited to an after-school program by teacher's recommendation. They are given the opportunity to learn in a small group setting focused on language skills. In an effort to expose ELLS to American culture, we also sponsor an annual trip to a Mets baseball game whereby ELLS and their parents are invited to attend. 2018-19 CEP 59  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that are used to support ELLS include a leveled library in each class, picture dictionaries, glossaries (available in English and their native language), and technology programs such as Razz-Kids, StarFall, Brain Pop and I-Ready. Promethean boards are also utilized for all ELLS. Additional materials used in the lower grades include the phonics program- Wilson's Fundations. The grammar series, Houghton Mifflin's English Workbook Plus, is also used in the upper grade classrooms. Educational board games, manipulatives and realia are often utilized. Content Area Instructional Materials are used in math and include but are not limited to manipulatives, math card games, and math in literacy books. In Social Studies and Science, glossaries, picture cards, maps and atlases are available to ELLS. Our literacy program is supplemented with ESL appropriate picture books and dictionaries, posters, poems and listening centers where students can follow along with their books. On-line Reading / Llistening programs are also used, as appropriate for groups or individual students, such as Raz-Kids, Starfall, I-Ready, Brain Pop and MyOn. Our students also have access to many of these programs from home. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Teachers who speak students' native language give support to newcomers in all content areas such as Math, Science, and Social Studies by translating and explaining orally. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are available to students to use in classrooms. Translated written versions of state tests are available. Oral translators are hired for lower incidence languages to translate the state tests in content areas. Paraprofessionals who speak other languages are also utilized to assist in translations with students and their parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources support and correspond to ELLS' ages and grade levels. Services and supports correspond to the students ages and grade levels by appropriately placing students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Several orientation meetings are offered to incoming P.S 69 students, as well as their parents in order to be introduced to the school and the curriculum. A Kindergarten parent orientation meeting, as well as a meeting for parents of incoming 3 rd grade students is offered in late spring. Administrators, guidance counselors, teachers, the nurse, parent coordinator and the parents association president, are all speakers at these meetings. The parent coordinator also conducts tours of the school in the Spring and Fall and when needed, throughout the year, for newly admitted students and their families. P.S. 69 is the School of Performing Arts and participates in residencies related to the arts, such as dance, art and music. We hold talent shows and holiday shows in which many cultures are represented. In the area of technology, all classrooms have computers connected to the internet, laptops, Smartboards, Promethean boards, or iPads. All ELLS have the opportunity to use online educational programs such as Starfall, Brain Pop, Razz Kids and I-Ready. From January to April , ELLS from grade 2 to grade 5 are offered the Title III after school program where they work on the test taking skills taught by certified ENL teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 2018-19 CEP 60  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All our ESL teachers are state certified and all have dual certifications in ESL and Common Branches. Those teachers are able to use ENL strategies as well as provide the core content that elementary students receive from self-contained common branches classroom teachers. All personnel who work with ELLs receive staff development on Chancellor's Days, and throughout the year during the Monday professional learning time. Teachers are trained in using scaffolding techniques, such as modeling, bridging, and contextualization. P.S. 69's PD for Title III teachers includes workshops on preparing ELLS for the NYSESLAT and strategies to improve comprehension. ESL Teacher Specialists also attend ESL liaison meetings as they become available from our BFSC, in order to stay abreast of compliance and keep informed of policy. PD Plan for all ELL Personnel Professional Development will include our ESL teaching staff, as well as Common Branches teachers, Assistant Principals, paraprofessionals, service providers, and Special Education teachers, in the use of data to inform instruction. ATS Reports (RNMR and RLAT), NYC Performance Assessments, ReadyGen and GoMath units of study assessments, and item skills analysis of state exams are reviewed. Professional Development in-house for our ELL teaching staff as well as all other teachers and paraprofessionals will focus on differentiation and use of Multiple Entry Points to address the needs of all our learners. This year we will also focus on using formative assessments and rubrics to guide instruction and encourage independence in our students. Teachers of ELLS engage in Professional Development , in order to align the Common Core Standards to the curriculum. They also participate in Inquiry sessions, and Division of English Language Learners and Student Support workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Guidance Counselor is continuously learning about the cultures of our students in order to best support them and their families as they transition to middle school. ELLS in 5th grade who are transitioning to the 6th grade, participate in activities guided by our Guidance Counselor and aimed at developing and improving social skills and developing coping strategies to adapt to their new school environment. 5 th grade students tour their new school and attend open houses with their parents in an effort to make the transition to middle school successful. In June, middle schools' principals are invited to our school to meet the graduating classes. Tours to middle schools are also scheduled. Our Guidance Counselor meets with 5th grade teachers to discuss students' middle school choices, and also assists with the application process in order to provide students a smooth transitioning to middle school. Our school provides professional development to all teachers that specifically addresses the needs of ELLS. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language 2018-19 CEP 61  acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLS. For all ENL teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLS. Agendas and attendance records are kept by our Literacy Coach as well as by ESL Teacher Specialists in our records binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? This year, teachers of ELL students schedule individual meetings with the parents or guardians of ELLS during open school nights and Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays. Individual meetings are scheduled to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Interpreters/translators are available for such meetings in the language or mode of communication the parent best understands. Records of the individual meetings with ENL parents are kept by the pedagogues concerned. A log is kept of the date, student and topic discussed by the pedagogues. A parent may be contacted either by phone or by a note sent home asking for a mutually agreeable time. At the time of the meeting, the goals of the program may be discussed as well as the child’s language development needs in content areas that apply. Efforts are made to ensure that the meeting is conducted in a language or mode the parent best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 69 has a strong Parent Association who is welcoming and composed of parent representatives of our school community. They organize fundraisers and have many activities throughout the year to strengthen various school programs. Parents are invited to participate in curriculum based celebrations, multicultural celebrations, culminating enrichment and residency activities, our Science Fair, etc. ELLS and their parents are invited to a Mets baseball game where they can become familiar with the American past-time. Parents also take part in decisions concerning the school through various committees such as the SLT and Title l Committee. Our Project Share counselor also works with our students and families on issues of grieving, abuse, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Martha Vazquez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Jackson Heights School School DBN: 30Q069 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Martha G. Vazquez Title Principal Jo Ann Lyons Assistant Principal Marina Mrazovic Parent Coordinator Isabel Vavro ENL/Bilingual Teacher Azmari Rahaman Parent n/a Helen Zias n/a Sandra Valdivia Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Julie Ferrara School Counselor Dr. P. Composto Evelyn Mosquea Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Administrator Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/26/15 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q069 School Name: P.S. 69 Superintendent: Dr. P. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marina Mrazovic Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 69 recognized the importance of communicating with parents. We have been providing written translation of memos for parents into the most commonly spoken languages. Administrators, ENL teachers, and Parent Coordinator work collaboratively to assess our schools written translation and oral interpretation needs by examining the RPOB report from ATS whis is based on the Home Language Survey filled out by parents of our students. We also send out a parent survey requesting preferred language of communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Chinese Russian Urdu English Spanish Bengali Chinese Russian Urdu 68 10 9 .005 .005 .003 English Spanish Bengali Chinese Russian Urdu 68 10 9 .005 .005 .003 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These school-generated documents were previously translated and allow for the insertion of an updated dates or name of person responsible. Welcome Letter: outlines school procedures, entry and dismissal procedures, school uniform policy Family Night notice; Internet Access Policy; Photo releases September / Annually September / Annually We use DOE provided documents Most documents were previously translated, but allow for the insertion of an updated deadline or name of person responsible. Guidance newsletters, announcements, important dates Ongoing / Monthly or according to DOE calendar Curriculum information, e.g. the HIV/AIDS curriculum Ongoing / Monthly or according to unit completion New documents, if any, are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation in a timely fashion. DOE provided templates/materials are used and/or updated previously translated documents. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Individual parent-teacher conferences as needed, which can occur during the Parent Engagement time set aside on Tuesday afternoons, or during the day considering teacher and parent availability. Ongoing / As needed Citywide Parent-Teacher afternoon and/or evening conferences Scheduled meetings between parents and guidance counselor IEP meetings September 25, 2018 November 15, 2018 March 14, 2019 May 14, 2019 Ongoing / As needed Ongoing / As needed January (gr. 3) Orientation meetings: Kindergarten, third grade, fifth grade May (Kindergarten) Information meetings: ELL program selection meeting, state testing meeting June (gr. 5) October interpretation service(s)? Staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) who speak the language are made available to interpret. Over-the-phone translation services are also utilized. DOE provided templates are used and/or previously translated documents updated with new times/dates. Staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) who speak the language are made available to interpret. Over-the-phone-translation services are also utilized. Staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) who speak the language are made available to interpret. Over-the-phone translation services are also utilized. Staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) who speak the language are made available to interpret. Over-the-phone translation services are also utilized. Staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) who speak the language are made available to interpret. 2018-19 CEP 67  January Over-the-phone translation services are also utilized. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger is used and messages are translated into Spanish. School Messenger also has the capability of translating into Bengali. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the September Faculty Meeting, staff is advised of staff's ability to access translation services, provided with the over-the- phone translation number and instructions on how to use this resource. A memo is also distributed on the first day of the school year detailing the procedures established in CR A-663 to provide language access to parents/guardians. Staff also receives "I Speak" brochures. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 69 will provide each parent who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services with instructions on how to obtain such services. A sign in each of the covered languages is posted in a conspicuous location near the entrance (lobby) to the school indicating the room where a copy of the written notification can be obtained. Individual "I Speak" brochures are available in the lobby as well, in the main office, and through the teachers. Our Parent Coordinator is informed of the resources available at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site and this information is also available to key staff, such as our ENL teachers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 68  Other than through daily oral contact, P.S. 69 will consider a parent survey to gather feedback on our ability to provide services that facilitate communication between parents and our school. Findings will drive any changes required to address any shortcomings. 2018-19 CEP 69 
