2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q072 School Name: CATHERINE & COUNT BASIE MIDDLE SCHOOL 72 Principal: OMOTAYO CINEUS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Catherine and Count Basie MS 28Q072 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 0000342800010072 6-8 133-25 Guy R Brewer Blvd 7187236200 School Number (DBN): 7185271675 Fax: Ms. Linette Edwards Ledwards3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Omotayo Cole Cineus Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Wesley Ramsey Amina Wright karlaugustin unknown n/a Nicole Johnson Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Ms Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7185572618 Phone Number: 7185271675 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ms Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard NY 11416, mwiks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Omotayo Cole Cineus wesleyramsey unknown Deborah Gill unknown n/a n/a Nicole Johnson AminaWright Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  KarlAugustin LeiAnn Mosby Andre Youmans Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission : Our mission is to meet the need of every young person through ● Collaboration ● Opportunity ● Experience 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Instructional Focus At Catherine and Count Basie Middle School, teaching and student learning will be achieved through student-centered instruction as demonstrated by high quality discussions, the use of open-ended questions and actionable feedback. These steps will improve instruction, comprehension and collaboration in both literacy and mathematics. The Cycle of Learning at Catherine and Count Basie Teach Learn Experience Use Teach: This is the direct instruction that teachers have planned and created for student understanding of ideas, concepts and subject matter Learn : All young people can and will learn something in every classroom. Our role is to guide their learning to ensure their critical thinking skills are peeked and subject matter is understood. Experience: Each young person will have a different experience with an instructor and in their learning. Capturing their experience with what is being taught to make information come alive and ensure retention makes instruction meaningful. Use: Young people should know how to use all instruction outside of the classroom. They should have the capacity to explain concepts, ideas, steps and skills in subject matter Our Vision : 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Catherine and Count Basie Middle School is a community of INSTRUCTIONAL INNOVATION that provides CHOICES and OPTIONS for students to become CRITICAL THINKERS and LIFELONG LEARNERS in an environment of care and respect for all. Collaboration is the development of a shared vision and mission from the Catherine and Count Basie community. Opportunity is the creation of individualized instruction for all students through differentiation of instruction, curriculum planning, scheduling and teaching Experience is the establishment of relationships with young people to provide a safe and nurturing environment for learning and the development of healthy social and emotional students 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education: Our growing "Students with IEPs" community has required increase work in differentiation of Instruction. Our ongoing professional development includes the importance of examining the data and performance of all of our students. Our students with IEPs data continues to show growth and development through a standards aligned instructional program in ELA and Mathematics, while experiencing teaching and learning that is relevant for their own learning style, age and grade. ELLs: Our English Language learners community, receives increased "push in" opportunities to ensure they are learning in their peer groups while increasing their language aquisition. We have provided more technology for our ELL students to use current applications ("apps") to support the student and the classroom teacher throughout instruction. Increasing our schoolwide focus on vocabulary "At Risk" Students: As per our current data some of our "At Risk" students are in need of additional support to prevent failure and retention. The community of these students includes both those students who are performing below grade level due to academic challenges where the intervention programs are not enough, nor has the referral process been initiated and/or those student who although due to citywide disportionality have become identified as recurring or "recidivious" behavior concerns. Ongoing work with our SBST, Counselors, Social Workers and community based organizations in the development of good mental health, family relationships, academic intervention and adolescence continue to support our students through their middle school years. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  We observed our greatest gains in the Framework for Great Schools in the area of "Effective School Leadership", "Rigorous Instruction" . The observed increases in these areas also has provided a foundation for the areas in which we will invest in our young people for the 2018-2019 school year. As a school we will develop our community's cognitive ability through the increase development of data driven assessment with the partnership with Teaching Matters. Catherine and Count Basie will also increase teacher collaboration, ownership and responsibility to the execution of instruction through our 3 Buckets student centered discussion, open ended questions and actionable feedback. This will be accomplished through the increase of trust, team building and challenging instruction developed for, and offered to, our staff and scholars. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q072 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 375 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 86 81 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 63 51 11 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 77.6% % Reduced Lunch 6.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.6% 14.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Hispanic, ED No N/A 65 69 90.3% 3.5% 29.1% 68.5% 8.8% 5.9% 4 30% 8.1 13.3% 19% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 1b. Needs/Areas for Improvement: The inner core of the framework-Rigorous instruction, supportive environment and collaborative teachers is our school focus in the development of the delivery of instruction. Our focus and incorporated standards include Reading informational text, key ideas and details as well as language for ELA. In Mathematics working across the grades with expressions and equations, ratios and proportions, as well as, statistics and probability for mathematics. Supporting our teachers instruction includes the alignment of the "priority" standards with our current curriculum to ensure student mastery can be achieved. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Curriculum that have been implemented to ensure alignment to CCLS are as follows: ● Expeditionary Learning for ELA ● Go Math ● Passport Social Studies Curriculum ● UA for Science Teachers will receive ongoing professional development in the delivery of instruction, data and assessment in order to carry out standards based instruction Data driven instruction is supported by: Uniform and periodic assessments (through the support of Teaching Matters, Assessment and Development) which are administered 4 times a year. Assessments are aligned to CCLS. Teachers use data results to refine and prioritize curriculum items and work in teacher teams to make instructional decisions based on data for the grade. Collaboratively teachers will refine instructional practices as new data becomes available The areas where improvement is needed are : ● SOP 3. 4- School leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology and other enrichment opportunities. Teacher Teams will meet and devise ways to incorporate a cross curricular approach and expectation for students. Teams will work together and demonstrate accountability through uniformity and execution of best practices in their weekly meetings and student work. ● SOP 3.3 & 3.5- (Quality Review indicator 2.2- Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels) In order to address this, we will implement a data analysis team which will include data point persons in every subject area who will analyze and interpret data for the subject area. This will provide grade and subject teacher teams clear information about the data trends from interim assessments and will allow teams to create strategic instructional decisions about how to address concern areas by making strategic adjustments to the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Part 2. Annual Goal: By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Middle School will improve instructional strategies in mathematics and ELA by incorporating effective student led discussion, actionable feedback and open ended questions in daily instruction as measured by 3 school wide embedded weekly constructed response which will increase student proficiency by at least 10% as measured by the NYS Mathematics and ELA Examination 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). instructional support and coaching: The professional Development Calendar is devised to incorporate each Domain to review and analyze the components for 90% of our teacher to obtain a rating of "effective". This professional development will also provide our school community with a common language when discussing feedback and the observation process Weekly team meetings built in to the schedule Teachers with HEDI score under 2.5 Grade/ subject area team teachers Quarterly assessments schoolwide Implementation of MSQI program-ongoing RTI/MTSS programming for students Subgroups Special Education Development of the writing of Quality IEP's Increase the number of students receiving instruction in the least restrictive environment Increase proficiency of students with IEPs as measured by the NYS examination Students 6-8 Sept, Dec, March, June Tier 1, 2, 3 Sept- June ELL students IEP Self Contained Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept- March Peer instructional coaches, MSQI LIteracy coach, MSQI coordinator, literacy consultant nd demonstration teachers Sept- June Data point person in core subject areas Common Planning meetings Grade level planning Data analysis team, testing coordinator Meet with elementary schools to identify successful RTI programs ELL Teacher, Academy Coordinators, FSC, District Language Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to inform our families of our high expectations and action plan for rigorous instruction through the use of our Instructional focus, CEP, parental workshops and quarterly parent meetings. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors and social workers will be the key personnel for implementation. to assure accountability, administration will work closely for the oversight and monitoring of attendance and understanding through surveys, parent conferences and school wide communication systems (IO Education and Blackboard) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Collaboration with Community based organizations to provide resources to help meet instructional and parental involvement goals through extended day programs and weekend prep programs (i.e. “March Madness”) Funding from Extended School Day Violence Prevention School Grant and Community School funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers’ instructional progress will be monitored by the observation cycle and HEDI score. By January 2019 5% of students will demonstrate an increase in literacy strategies as measured by unit assessments, standards based periodic assessment and RTI/MTSS instruction as a reflection of the 85% of all pedagogical staff executing effective instruction in Domain 3 in the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Spring 2018 NYS ELA Examination, June Instructional Plan , 4 week assessments and periodic assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School strengths Quality Review 2017-  3.4*: Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations – Proficient - Staff Handbook communicates the mission, vision, instructional expectations, grading policy, lesson planning requirements, which reinforce school wide expectations for teaching and culture - Use of Pupil Path/ IO Edcuation , Black Board Phone system, Parent Conferences, and school sponsored programs and events help communicate and promote positive school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  - Saturday Program, Bi monthly all day Saturday "March Madness" Saturday Initiative (includes academic intervention and social/ physical programs to address the whole child), Beacon Program and Community School Teacher Initiative grant, School Clubs before and After School all help provide ongoing support and guidance for students. These programs are Alvin Ailey Dance, Ballroom Dancing, Arista Honor Society, Student Council, Beacon, Gospel Choir, MOUSE Squad, Broadway Junior, Penny Harvest, Multicultural Club, Soldier Program - Special Programs: Saturday School, Specialized High School Prep, Regents Prep, - International Travel Program, Summer Transition Program, Spanish Proficiency Exam, Earth Science and Integrated Algebra Regents - Tutoring & Gender Classes - Champs/ Beacon Programs - Baseball, Wrestling, Cheerleading, Step, Track and Field, Flag Football and Basketball - - Framework for Great Schools- Points to address Common Core shifts in Literacy and Mathematics, Improvement of discussion and questioning techniques, Greater impact on Teaching and Learning Self Assessment - Support staff designated to intervene and mediate - Basie Bugle, Monthly School Calendar, Academy Newsletter provide the school community resources of upcoming events and activities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie will increase visible systems and procedures for safety and intervention as evidenced by a 10% decrease in annual OORs reporting 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue to provide a nurturing, caring environment for every young person. We will, in collaboration with administration, teachers, parents and students ensure that peer interactions are positive and students have support to address their academic and socio-emotional needs. In order to accomplish this goal, we will continue to utilize and enhance our advisory program through the ongoing training and introduction of restorative practices. We will conduct a needs assessment, identify the root of the identified need areas and determine pathways to address them. In addition, we will support students by refining our tiered progressive discipline system and restorative practices with students who have demonstrated challenging behaviors. All of the protocols and procedures in the progressive discipline policy will be explicitly outlined in the student and staff handbook, and will be designed to proactively address students needs instead of being reactive. We will also increase PD of the Danielson Framework to address need areas of teachers who scored lower than a 2.5 in Raport and Respect and Managing Student Behaviors. As a community, we will develop a shared understanding of the framework for Great Schools by conducting quarterly PD school wide and in small cluster inquiry teams – PD will include conducting a Needs Assessment as it relates to the identified areas of concern, then establishing goals through the lens of the Framework For Great Schools. Then knowing our target areas, we will utilize the Five Whys Protocol to help get at the foundational root of these challenge areas and uncover multiple perspectives of the community stakeholders. Next we will utilize the instructional development tool to help our school leadership teams reflect on our current practices, create a supportive environmental focus, and refine practices to support this focus and promote positive student culture. Once we have a deeper understanding of the framework and dig deep into our challenge areas, we will engage in cycles of learning deciding what change we will introduce, how we will assess if it is working and determine Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, Instructional Leaders, Peer Instructional Coaches, Individualized Education Plan Teacher, Demonstration Teacher, Academy Coordinators, Guidance June 2018-June 2019 - Teachers/ Inquiry teams/ cluster teams Teachers June 2018-2019 Admin, Leadership team, Teacher Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  what school community members will be involved and what they will do to create a maximum impact. Within each quarter we will address the multiple needs areas and determine if they are being addressed. Restorative Practices, during the 2018-2019 school year Catherine and Count Basie will compile a handbook for staff and students that outlines the usage and next steps of Restorative Circles, intervention and Restorative Coordinator Teachers Parents Student June 2018-2019 Social worker Restorative Coordinator Progressive Discipline – Meet Plan with Extended Cabinet to revise, refine and improve school wide progressive discipline plan which will include: Students September 2018 – June 2019 Tiered Behavioral Systems – - Tier 1 – Positive School Wide Discipline Program, Routine Evaluation of System in Biweekly Meetings of Extended Cabinet, and Ongoing Professional Development - Tier 2 – Targeted Support for Small Groups–short term interventions/ goals and rapid response for students who do not respond to Tier 1 interventions - Tier 3 – Targeted Support for Individuals who do not respond to Tier 2 – with long terms, intensive interventions Tier 1 - 3 interventions may include Administration, Teachers, Academy Coordinators, Guidance, Crisis Intervention Teacher, Support Staff, CCNY Beacon, and Mental Health Organizations including Kidwise) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to inform our families of our high expectations and action plan for rigorous instruction through the use of our Instructional focus, CEP, parental workshops and quarterly parent meetings. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors and social workers will be the key personnel for implementation. to assure accountability, administration will work closely for the oversight and monitoring of attendance and understanding through surveys, parent conferences and school wide communication systems (IO and Blackboard). We will increase our backpacked letters, outreach and community information to improve our parental involvement and voice in school level decision making. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Individualized Programming – Cabinet, Programmer, Data Specialists - Specialized Events and Activities for Target Group - Establish New Academies with Coordinators – Dual Language, Gender, Performing Arts and S.T.E.M. - Web Based Communication including update of school website, staff and student handbook - Academic and Sports Based After School Programs - Curriculum from Advisory Board - School Based and SBO Counseling Services - Support Groups - Specialized Courses - Staff Workshops - Parent Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Catherine and Count Basie intervention programs will provide documentation of success of at least a 3% decrease as measured against the February 2018 OORs data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2019 NYS English Language Arts Examination, June Instructional plan, informal assessments and periodic assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Catherine and Count Basie has peer instructional coaches, model teachers, teacher leaders and lead teacher assistants who facilitate initiatives in the school improvement process; by attending, applying and turn-keying, work-sessions seminar and institutes. ● Pre-tenured staff members are receptive to professional development ● Protected time for teacher team meetings ● Some teachers are engaged in inter-visitation and debriefing sessions Area of Improvement: ● Difficulty matching professional opportunity with teachers programs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  ● Generational gap ● A growing understanding of the benefits of collaboration ● Teachers need guided support to improve their practice ● Teachers have demonstrated a need to utilize effective protocols to look at student work Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 cross curricular teams will analyze student work and data in order to develop and revise rigorous integrated units of study reflective of the Chancellors equity initiative as evidence by 100% of students completing common core standards aligned PBL tasks 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Provide all teachers with professional development of Danielson and DI and will All Teachers Establish a school wide inter visitation and PD Calendar Weekly from September to June Assistant Principals, Peer instructional coaches, Demonstration Teachers cycles of Equity and Access PD Interim assessment in all major subjects at least 4 times a year and exit slip collected daily. All Staff September to June Professional development team Assessment Data collected and analyze during teacher team meeting Survey students four times a year on interest and attitude toward class Teachers by Department Using Assessment Matters/Mastery Connect to inform progress report 8 times a year. Parents UFT Rep., Teacher Leader, Selected Teacher, Supervisor and paraprofessional Classroom teacher Parent Coordinator, AP Weekly from September to June November, January, March, May Survey parents four times a year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to inform our families of our high expectations and action plan for collaboration through the use of our Instructional focus, CEP, parental workshops and quarterly parent meetings. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors and social workers will be the key personnel for implementation. ) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  ● Consultant to conduct PD sessions ● Coverages to allow teachers to attend PD ● Scheduling of teacher team meeting in master schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% of students and teachers will be able to apply the criteria from the NYS rubric to an end of unit writing task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYS writing rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity- The School Leadership will continue to engage in professional development and instructional support provided by the Superintendent and Borough Field Office. This support will provide the school leadership with best practices to support the District, School and Leadership goals as well as, the development of all teachers as measured by the Danielson rubric of observation  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions In working with the Superintendent Liasion the school leadership will address gaps in curriculum and increase the support of classroom instruction through focused and purposeful professional development. The principal will continue 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  to invest in human resources in an effort to support young people in class sizes, extended day opportunities and higher instructional expectations.  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support The school will invest in the development of a curriculum team with the support of an outside consultant to review and analyze current curriculum choices and execution of instruction.  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions Teachers are responsible for engaging young people in meaningful, engaging instruction and discussion through the ongoing usage of differentiation of instruction and deeper engagement with the content. These choices and decisions will be identified through the observation and feedback cycle. The administration will continue to build capacity through opportunities for teacher leadership through mentoring, coaching and professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of Catherine and Count Basie teachers will be provided with differentiated professional development based on observed needs in an effort to create a cohesive professional learning community as evidence by 60% of teachers observed being rated effective in at least one component of Domain 3 in Advance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Catherine and Count Basie will have 2 retreats (Fall (election day)and Spring(chancellors conference)and 1 institute (summer)where team building activities and trust exercises will be included. All teachers August-June Entire Staff Meet bi weekly with teacher leaders, APs and data coordinators to create goals and action plans for instruction Selected teachers August-June Admin, teacher leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to inform our families of our high expectations and action plan for Effective School Leadership through the use of our Instructional focus, CEP, parental workshops and quarterly parent meetings. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors and social workers will be the key personnel for implementation. to assure accountability, administration will work closely for the oversight and monitoring of attendance and understanding through surveys, parent conferences and school wide communication systems (Skedula and Blackboard). Increased responsibility of the School Leadership Team and more effort to ensure that school level decision making is transparent and collaborative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Protected meeting time in master schedule in for staff students and administration ● Resources for PD ● Grants and funding for outside consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 50% of option 2 teachers will demonstrate "effective" attributes in Domain 3 as measured by the Danielson rubric through observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Catherine and Count Basie is a community school as we have partnered with the Child Center of New York’s Beacon program. As a community school, The Basie Beacon offers family activities such as Zumba, Knitting and Game night as an effort to strengthen the family and school dynamic. We have partnered with The Beacon to provide targeted students with an extended day program (0 and 9 period) to support students in being proficient in ELA and Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 By June 2019 50% of the parent body will participate in at least 3 parent worskhops or conferences in an effort to support their scholar and the school community as evidenced by a 20% increase of parental attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Part 3. Action Plan: Parents Sept- June Parent Coordinator Catherine and Count Basie will continue to encourage parental involvement evidenced by distributing school information via email, text telephone calls and documentation to all parents. The parent Coordinator will work diligently with the Principal and PTA officials to ensure continued productivity. Parent Coordinator will attend all recommended Professional development workshop to become a more effective provider and advocate for the parents and families we service. The parent coordinator will attend district monthly PDs. Use of IO Education (PupilPath) to communicate with parents about their child’s academic performance and important school information. Introduction of APPT and Home Visits to encourage increased parental involvement Parent coordinator Sept -June Parent coordinator, admin Parents Sept-June Teachers, admin, parent coordinator Parents Sept-June Teachers Guidance Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Basie Beacon, Life Camp, New York City Community School Office Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4. Budget and Resource Alignment ● Creation of academies in which students will have course options to meet instructional needs in each subject as per the vision of the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  ● Collaboration with Community based organizations to provide resources to help meet instructional and parental involvement goals through extended day programs and weekend prep programs (i.e. “March Madness”) ● A listing of PDs to attend ● Metro cards to attend PDs and for parents who attend meetings or any other school event. ● Incentives for parents who are consistently involved in school events or meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 Catherine and Count Basie will provide at least 2 parent meetings/workshops with at least attendance of 100 parents and/guardians in total. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. surveys and attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who receive a level 2 or below on the ELA State Exam Self Contained . Mid-High Level 2 students (pushables, 2.5-2.8) . Students close to approaching standards (1.7-1.9) Students who receive a level 2 or below on the Math State Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Morning and Evening Success Academy .100 Book Challenge Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small-group instruction .One-to-one conferencing/individualized instruction .Saturday Success . Personalized learning and Intervention .March Madness .Tutoring RTIperiod Morning and Evening Success Academy .Enrichment .Saturday Success .March Madness Small-group instruction .One-to-one conferencing/individualized instruction . Personalized learning and Intervention .Tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before school (0 period) . During School . After school (9 th period) .Tuesdays (During club hours) Before school (0 period) . During School . After school (9 th period) .After school .Tuesday (During club hours -Tuesdays) During the Day Science Students who receive a level 2 or below on the ELA State Exam Urban Advantage Small-group instruction . Learning Gardens .One-to-one conferencing/individualized instruction . Weekends .After School 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 . Personalized learning and Intervention .During school .Tutoring . Breaks/recesses .Tuesday (During club hours) Small-group instruction .One-to-one conferencing/individualized instruction . Personalized learning and Intervention Small group instruction . One-to-one conference .classroom discussions During the school day .After school .Weekends Social Studies Students who receive a level 2 or below on the ELA State Exam New York Historical Society .Library of Congress At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) . Students that receive a 65 and below on their report cards Individual Counseling .Group Counseling . Students with chronic or serious behavior issues . Behavior Intervention Program (BIP) .Advisory .Kidwise .Beacon 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. school supplies, text, uniform, winter attire Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Teachers will be recruited using performance interviews conducted by our recruitment committee. ● The recruitment committee consists of teachers, administrators and students. ● Teachers will be invited to attend summer institute. ● New teachers will be part of the New Teacher Induction Program 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Peer instructional coaches, demonstration teachers and untitled teacher leaders will facilitate initiatives in the school improvement process; by attending, applying and turn-keying, work-sessions seminar and institutes. ● New Teacher Induction program for new teachers ● Protected time for teacher team meetings ● inter-visitation and debriefing sessions ● PD calendar for the school year Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  As a Focus School we have invested funding in consultants to support curriculum and development. We will work with consultant to support our teachers in the delivery of instruction through professional development, one to one coaching and modeling 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Through the development of our staff's focus and student learning Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● During June planning in 2015, teacher teams identified assessments and in addition to the data they will provide about students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 320,403.00 0 11,200.00 0 4,078,736.00 x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Catherine and Count Basie Middle School 72 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community Catherine and Count Basie Middle School 72 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Catherine and Count Basie Middle School 72 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our Community School works together to improve the lives of everyone in the school community academically, socially and emotionally. Through our funding we offer young people after school support through additional instruction, tutoring, homework help and one to one academic counseling. Our partnership with CCNY here through the Basie Beacon provides male and female mentoring during the school day, violence prevention, sports and arts, events and community service to address the needs of our students and families. We also incorporate mental health support through both CCNY and Sheltering Arms to address both family and individual counseling needs, attendance and parental workshops. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Community School Initiative will increase students academic performance in Mathematics by 10% as measured by the New York State Mathematics Examination. By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Community School Initiative will improve target student attendance by 30% as measure by the daily attendance roster and EDSVP data sorter By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Community School Initiative will provide at least 3 parent workshops on parenting, assessment and community awareness. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Catherine and Count Basie's partnership will provide students and families with tools and strategies to increase student academic performance in their current grade. The alignment of our CS goals with our Framework for Great School goals fro Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. The impact on mathematics and students well being will provide student support to increase our schools percentages in both areas. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CCNY-Basie Beacon Entire School Afterschool By July 2019, Catherine and Count Basie 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  During School Academic, Athletic, Social, Emotions Community School Initiative will increase students academic performance in Mathematics by 10% as measured by the New York State Mathematics Examination. By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Community School Initiative will improve target student attendance by 30% as measure by the daily attendance roster and EDSVP data sorter By June 2019, Catherine and Count Basie Community School Initiative will provide at least 3 parent workshops on parenting, assessment and community awareness. By June 2019, identified families will learn at least 3 strategies for supporting students emotionally through at least 2 Sheltering Arms parent workshops By June 2019, 60% of the student body will receive violence intervention strategies Sheltering Arms Selected Families Afterschool During School Social, Emotional Mental Health professionals Life Camp Entire School Afterschool During School 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment from a licensed social worker from LifeCamp Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The community school funding is being used for Community School Director 2 ELA teachers Accelerated programing for Regents preparation King of Kings Mentoring LifeCamp Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside PTA Funded X SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  4. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Community School Director-Nicole Johnson 2. Community School Funding-Attendance, ELT, Mental health 3. Community School Forums 4. Community School Weekly Meetings Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community School Director Youth Advocate Parental Outreach Counselors Mentors Teachers Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School Director Youth Advocate Parental Outreach Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Mentors Teachers Instructional alignment with core curriculum Day school opportunities during lunch Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Community School Initiative will begin in September and the meetings, activities and events will take place throughout the school year until June Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Catherine and Count Basie Middle School Borough Queens School Number 072 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Omotayo Cineus Coach Leroy Samson ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Guy Ramsbottom Teacher/Subject Area Karl Augustin/Math Teacher/Subject Area Yvette Lochansing/Science Related-Service Provider Amy Reich/Speech Superintendent Mabel Sardui Assistant Principal Betina Severin Coach n/a School Counselor Jennifer Alleyne Parent Ms Wright Parent Coordinator Adwa Awhuku Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 618 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? MS72 uses a variety of assessment tools to help assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These include the DRA, Teacher's College Running Records and EdPerformance. These assessments are given throughout the year. The data compiled from these assessment tools allow the teachers to keep a continual eye on the progress of the students. By using the data, in conjunction with data from other assessments such as the state ELA, math and science exams, MOSL exams and class grades, teachers can create an appropriate individualized action plan for future instruction of the student.The ESL teacher has benefited greatly over the past year from workshops on how to use data effectively. These workshops have helped the teacher use data as a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  formative tool. The data collected from our biweekly math tests show that, although our expanding and commanding students often come within the top third of their class, they still struggle with questions that are heavy on academic language. This is also reflected in our biweekly ELA tests, where we find that the success of the students at expanding and commanding levels is related to the amount of academic language in the questions. The data from these assessments indicate that ENL students would benefit from further support in their core content language. This year we have created thematic units that specifically address the language found in both the ELA and math curriculum so that students can get used to recognising what is being required of them. By doing this, the ENL teacher will be able to create differentiated lessons that target issues that impede the progress of ENL students (vocabulary, text complexities, cultural shifts, background knowledge etc.). Our school's instruction is targeting the ENL student's ability to effectively scaffold their use of CALP onto their foundation of BICS. Former ENL students will also continue to receive support from the ENL teacher. The individual needs of former ENL students will be assessed through cluster meetings involving the core content teachers and the ENL provider. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have daily meetings set aside from 8.20 to 8.45 that allow our teachers to both create new assessments and study the data from prior assessments. This work is also continued during Monday and Tuesday afternoons. Every Math and ELA teacher is responsible for scanning and uploading the results from each biweekly assessment. The ENL teacher monitors the individual progress of every ENL student by liaising with the other teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ESL program is evaluated by monitoring progress on summative assessments such as the state ELA, math, science exams, and report card grades. Scores on the NYSESLAT exams are also used. In addition, teacher-created formative assessments, such as scores on tests, student work, and projects are used to monitor progress. Feedback from general education teachers on student performance and interaction with Native English speakers in the classroom is also taken into consideration. Parental feedback is also greatly encouraged In the current school year we have been using our own standards based periodic assessment to monitor the progress of our students in both ELA and math. In addition to this we have been using thematic units specifically designed for our ENL students. These units all have baseline assessments that are specifically aligned to the standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school uses the summative data to assign the students to their flexible groups. This is reflected in both the ENL groups and the RTI groups. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the patterns derived from the NYSESLAT, there is a general increase in student performanc across all modalities. However, students progressing from 7th to 8th grade show less improvement, particularly in writing. The speaking modality shows consistent improvement across the three grades. In most instances, student results are not reflective of last year's instruction within this school because the are new to the students are new to the school this year.The NYSITELL has demonstrated that 90% of our students entering the school have little to no experience with English. Accordingly we have created a program that specifically addresses the issues pertinent to ENL students who are at the entering leve 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All teachers meet daily in grade teams, and there are assessment cycles to ensure that teachers are able to respond to summative assessment data and make informed group choices. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Since the ESL program spans grades 6, 7, and 8, the students are heterogeneously grouped and meet at different times. The ESL program is a combination of push-in/pullout services. Entering and emerging students receive a minimum of 360 minutes of push-in/pull-out services a week which translates as eight periods a week. Transitioning and expanding students receive a minimum of 180 minutes a week and are serviced through push-in instruction in core content classes. Commanding students are serviced through a minimum of 90 minutes push in instruction per week. The push in groups are mixed proficiency levels. The teacher will push into the class and work with the ENL students to achieve the goals allotted to that lesson. The ENL teacher will also integrate language goals into every lesson. The ENL students in the pullout group are different grade levels but all at the entering or emerging level as dictated by the NYSESLAT. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All push-in and pull-out services are administered by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher is also responsible for scheduling ENL classes so that all ELL students receive the mandated instructional minutes. The students are pulled out during their talent periods so that ENL does not encroach on the core content areas. The ENL teacher works very closely with the ELA teacher so that instruction parallels the ELA curriculum. Through the collaboration of teachers, cluster teachers, and the Administration, a schedule is submitted for approval containing the required instructional minutes for all our ELLs as per the CR Part 154. English Language Learners receive between 180 and 360 minutes of Pull-out and Push-in English language instruction every week depending on their levels as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. The school utilizes the Expeditionary Learning curriculum; language is incorporated into the reading and writing mini-lessons and independent work. Classroom teachers also work with ELLs during small group instructions; many of our ELLs have been identified to participate in RTI groups. These groups target specific language and skills students require to be successful. The ENL curriculum has been adapted from the Expeditionary Learning curriculum, structuring in vocabulary, grammar, and early literacy support where needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English by general education staff in forty-five minute periods (90 minutes for Literacy and Math), with support from the ENL teacher. Additionally, the ENL teacher instructs students using lower-level text on content area subjects as a means of support. During pull-out sessions, the ENL teacher uses thematic units that incorporate the content of the core subjects to assist with comprehension. Other supports provided are the use of English and Native Language dictionaries and books, audio books, and Native Language speakers for instruction. All materials used in core content classes will be translated into the student's home language. Every ENL student is provided the core ELA material in their first language. All texts used in the student's native language will be in alignment with the CCLS. Every newcomer will be issued an I-Pad Mini so that they have instant access to translation technology. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher makes sure that each core content teacher is equipped with the necessary assessments in every ELL’s native language. These assessments are a combination of teacher made tests and past state exams. This allows those students who intend to take their state assessment in their native language to have the opportunity to practice dealing with both the format and content of the test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) SIFE students are evaluated in their native language to assess deficiencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking to better determine areas in need of greater support. Once the ESL teacher has assessed areas of weakness they will then work closely with the student's content teachers to create strategies that specifically address help the student in the identified areas. Once an action plan has been created it will be implemented by the student's cluster teachers as well as the ESL teacher with regular reviewing occurring during ongoing enquiry meetings. b) Newcomers are provided with a risk free, welcoming environment to meet the transitional needs of these newly arrived immigrants. These students are encouraged to become involved in learning their new language through role plays, simulations, projects, field trips and scaffolded lessons. It is important to provide informal assessments in order to know students' prior knowledge and build on the skills they already have in order for them to acquire new skills. Native language support may be provided, through home language print, technologies, translations in the native language and encouraging "buddy systems" of students who speak a same home language. When a new student is registered in our school, it is crucial to find out if they are literate in their native language in order to provide materials that will support them academically (i.e., books, glossaries, dictionaries). Students and teachers work together improving listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Focus is given to phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, decoding, encoding, as well as reading comprehension. Students who have to take state exams (i.e., ELA, Math, etc.) are taught explicit test taking skills and are encouraged to enroll in the school’s After School Program for further support. In order to provide ELLs native language support, state exams maybe administered in the student’s native language or when unavailable, translators are hired to support students. Newcomers receive explicit instruction that addresses their transitional needs and academic needs, as well as language development strategies. Listening comprehension is mainly targeted with newcomers, through the use of software and web based programs. Teachers work with newcomers in a rigorous language development program in order to prepare them to take the required ELA test after one year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  c) & d) For ELLs receiving services 4 - 6 years and for long-term ELLs, assessment data is carefully analyzed to determine areas of weakness and instruction is planned to address those weaknesses. Teachers regularly read assessment data to monitor the student’s progress in all content areas and better differentiate instruction for specific academic needs. The skills that prove to be more difficult are targeted in small group settings. According to 2013 NYSESLAT data, some of our students are struggling in reading and in writing. The school administers the edperformance exam to all students to specifically pinpoint the exact areas in which the student is struggling which allows the teachers to expand on the information offered in the NYSESLAT. The focus will be for teachers to target vocabulary development, and introduce students to new authors and genres to improve reading skills; via the use of graphic organizers, modeling, chants, songs, rubrics and a print rich environment. These are some of the components that enhance our daily teaching routines. e) Former ELLs will be given assistance on an individualized basis. The ELL teacher will work closely with the content teachers to create an action plan that will help address any areas where the former ELL might still need assistance. The ELL teacher will also ensure that all teachers are aware of the testing accommodations to which former ELLs are still entitled. Former ELLs will also be encouraged to sign up for all extracurricular programs open to ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL and content teachers all have access to the students' IEPs on the SESIS system. For ELL students with special needs, the IEP is used to guide accommodations in both instruction and testing. The teachers make note of the specific accommodations needed for each individual student. There is also ongoing communication between the teachers and related services personnel who work with these students as well as the parents, as a means of exchanging strategies and sharing assessment data to help the students perform on a differentiated grade level. Classroom teachers use a variety of instructional techniques, including direct instruction, indirect instruction, and experiential learning in order to support students. Using the workshop model, ELL-SWDs are given the opportunity to access grade level appropriate content, while independently practicing relevant skills and strategies. We have also implemented RTI sessions that uses a modified version of Orton-Gillingham. This allows students the opportunity to accelerate their English language development and participate in the general education curriculum. Differentiate instruction also occurs as a standard part of our instructional day, and students are provided with the opportunity to work with their peers and in small groups. In addition, all of our early childhood classrooms are rich with language opportunities for students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELL-SWDs are in the least restrictive environment. Where possible, the ESL teacher pushes in to these classes rather than pulling out so that the student can receive instruction in the environment most conducive to his or her learning style. This also allows the ESL teacher to work closely with the classroom teacher so that they can provide instruction that meets both the ESL needs of the student as well as those specific needs addressed in the student's IEP. Scheduling flexibility is demonstrated by the ENL teacher adjusting his schedule to Push-In to a classroom to support a students' needs. ICT and general education classes have been created in our school to support all students and their special needs. Educational Assistants (Paras) are provided if mandated by the students IEP. Our curriculum allows students the opportunity to access skills at a variety of different levels, supporting their overall development. Our teachers have created small instructional groups, targeted to students’ needs. The flexible nature of these groups acknowledges the times when students make progress and continue to move and push them to greater proficiency. This allows 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  us to support ELLs in their least restrictive environment. Grouping students based on ability, creating Cooperative Learning Groups, and scaffolding instruction allows us to meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWD's within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. This year we have an after school program specifically designed to help our ENL population with their math skills. The program focuses on academic language and helps to bridge the gap between BICS and CALPS. We have also dedicated a daily period to RTI. This has been school wide but during that time the ENL students are with the ENL teacher and they focus on academic language encountered in the ELA classroom. The RTI is in English and the after school program is in English, Spanish and French. We also offer Orton Gillingham classes for those students who need extra support in both English and their first language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will move from pull out programs towards push in programs for the majority of students. This will allow the ELL students greater support in their core subjects. Although we do not yet have enough students to justify it, we have also looked into the idea of implementing a dual language program for our Haitian students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? none 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are afforded equal access to all school programs throughout the cluster teachers and ENL teacher working closely to provide authentic home language materials to be used to support the ELLs in their core content classes. All ELLs have access to all after school programs and the ENL teacher ensures that all literature about the after school programs is available in multiple languages. The programs available to the ENL students are: ENL math after school program Saturday Academy RTI Orton Gillingham Program Beacon After School Alvin Ailey Dance Program 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All students who are new to English are given an IPad Mini to be used in every class. This technology assists the student in translating text (google translate) and practicing their English skills (through appropriate APPs). All reading materials in ELA are available in French and Spanish and any other languages are presented as audio texts for the student to use until the school can acquire the written text. Web sites that reflect our present learning themes such as Cool ENL Games, Reading A - Z, and Study Island are also used to enforce basic skills and content. Reading materials in different genres, non-fiction texts and vocabulary building dictionaries are used in content areas. Our classroom Listening Center includes native language books and magazines to support our ELL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered through the provision of bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, translation technology (IPad Minis), teacher support and authentic materials in the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Before the start of the school year the administration sits down and ensures that all services and resources correspond to the ELL population's ages and grade levels. These meetings occur frequently throughout the year. Related service providers also group students based on both age and ability level, in order to maximize instructional time with students. Related service providers also interact with the classroom teachers to further support and check on student’s development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the school year begins the guidance department and parent coordinator offer orientation meetings for all ELLs new to the building. Whenever a new ELL is enrolled (either at the start of the year or during the year) they have an orientation meeting with the ESL provider. In this meeting the new ELL is introduced to the school through an individual tour and a sit down question and answer session. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently our ELL population is offered Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher will be attending PD opportunities, workshops and collaborating with our ELA Consultant throughout the year. As of now he will be attending a series of workshops on bilingual education as well as a PD series on SIOP strategies. The ENL teacher is working closely with the ELA department to ensure instruction and strategies are aligned and infused into the curriculum for all students success. During the school year the ENL teacher will turnkey all the information from the workshops back to the school's entire staff so that best practices can be implemented throughout the building. These PDs will take place during professional development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  time as mandated by the teacher contract. This year the teachers of ELLs will attend workshop specifically designed to address supporting ELLS engaging in the Common Core Learning Standards. The first one of thee was a week long Orton Gillingham training seminar. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL team works very closely with guidance and the cluster teams to offer a wide range of support for those ELLs moving on to high school. During the year information on internationl high schools is presented to the parents in many formats. Guidance follows up with the parents so that the best possible fit can be found for the ELL. Cluster teachers work hard to produce a project based folder that can be used by students ELL students to demonstrate their progress during the year. The ENL teacher creates and presents workshops that keep the staff abreast of the latest ESL best practices. The times are calculated by the administrators in the building. Records of the workshops are kept in the PD binder in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every academic year the school organises individual one on one meetings for the parents of ELLs. During these meetings the ENL teacher will discuss the details of the school's ENL program, the individual language progress of the ELL and the language development needs in the content areas. If the parents need an interpreter then one will be provided either through teachers in the building or through NYCDOE resources. The staff also communicates with ELL parents in their native language through informational packets and home mailings. In addition to parent meetings, a translator is also present when there is an IEP meeting or whenever a parent has a question. We have taken advantage of the telephone translation services for Parent Teacher conferences and parent workshops. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the school year the parent organizer arranges several parent nights. These nights involve ELL parents/guardians coming to the school to participate in several different activities. At this time the parents are presented with a list of ELL resources available in the community. During these parent nights we emphasize the similarities between cultures and how they play into the American experience. These interactions with the parents fosters a relationship that allows better communication between the parents and the school. This way the parents feel more inclined to participate in school activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Omotayo Cineus, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Catherine and Count Basie Midd School DBN: 28Q072 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Omotayo Cineus Title Principal Betina Severin Assistant Principal Adwa Awhuku Parent Coordinator Guy Ramsbottom ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms Wright Parent Karl Augustin/Math Teacher/Subject Area Yvette Lochansing/Science Teacher/Subject Area Leroy Samson n/a Coach Coach Jennifer Alleyne School Counselor Mabel Sardui n/a n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Catherine and Count Basie Superintendent: Mabel Muniz-Sar DBN: 28Q072 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Guy Ramsbottom Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess M.S.72’s written translation and oral interpretation needs is based on the Home Language Survey completed by parents upon registering the student into the public school system. We also use ATS reports such as the RHLA and RPOB. We also have parents speak to stafff memebers in their native tongue to further evaluate their communication needs. We also periodically send out language questionnaires. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Haitian Creole Hindi English Punjabi Slovak Spanish Urdu Ukranian - - - 1 1 5 2 426 3 0 43 2 1 - - - 0.21 0.21 1.03 0.41 88.02 0.62 0 8.88 0.41 0.21 - - - 2 0 6 2 424 3 1 43 2 1 - - - 0.41 0 1.24 0.41 87.6 0.62 0.21 8.88 0.41 0.21 - - - 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? The discipline code September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These documents are translated centrally 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  The school calendar The Parent’s Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. September September IEPs Letters from the teacher Information pertaining to trips - - - We have a number of Spanish, French, Punjabi, Urdu and Haitian Creole speaking pedagogues and staff members, as a result, the majority of our parents are able to communicate, with school personnel without relying upon outside agencies. When a document needs to be translated in house, we can rely on those teachers to provide a translation. - - - - - - 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Nights, Approximately once a month 4 times a year Parent teacher Conference Parental Involvement Hour (every Tuesday). Every Tuesday Interpretation services are provided in house through teachers who are fluent in the relevant language. If no teachers are available interpretation will be provided through the interpretation phone lines. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Attendance Meetings When needed Guidance Meetings - - - When needed - - - - - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In event of a school emergency teachers will reach out using the interpretation phone line if the teacher cannot speak the parent's chosen language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school leadership will attend LTI training and then disseminate the information to the rest of the staff over the course of an afternoon PD. Refresher workshops will be given during the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) On entrance to the school the parents are greeted with a sign that helps the staff identify which language they speak. The Parent's Guide to Language Access is also available in the main office. Parents are also informed that it is there right to receive all communications in the language of their choice on entering the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will fill out a quality control card at the point of service. The card will ask for a brief evaluation of the service that was provided as well as potential needs for further services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 
