2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q076 School Name: P.S. 076 WILLIAM HALLET Principal: TIMOTHY MILLER 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: The William HalletSchool 343000010076 Pre-K - 5 Grades Served: School Number (DBN): 30Q076 School Address: 36-36 10th Street Long Island City, NY 11106 Phone Number: (718) 361-7464 Tim Miller School Contact Person: Fax: (718) 361-8014 TMiller15@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: TimMiller Christina Rivera Luisana Santana DemetraKalaitzidis Soraya Gomez N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 Superintendent’s Email Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 391-6122 Queens North FSC: Fax: (718) 391-6147 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: (718) 391-6147 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TimMiller Christina Rivera Susan Laboy Soraya Gomez N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable TasoFragopolous Christina Tserbis Teacher Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Demetra Kalaitzidis Jessica Salvitti Wendy Almestica Margarita Otero N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Chair/Teacher Parent/PTA Secretary Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview At PS 76Q, we recognize the individuality of every student and we strive to provide each child with the academic excellence of a supportive and enriching learning environment. Administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals are committed to professional development to ensure that high-impact teaching pushes students to reach their fullest potential. We work to offer students a tailored, Common Core-aligned educational experience in the least restrictive environment that will meet their physical, social, emotional and academic needs. We work to deeply engage parents in their children’s education to help promote a true love of learning and readiness for college and careers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 76Q - The William Hallet School is an elementary school located in Long Island City. There are 468 students from Pre-K to 5th grade. We serve a diverse student body: the school population comprises of 31% Black, 50% Hispanic, 9% White and 6% Asian and 4% other students. This includes 17% English language learners (ELLs) and 41% Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Boys account for 52% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The average attendance rate for the 2017-18 school year was 92%. We offer robost Arts programming, including visual arts and instrumental music classes during the school day, extracurricular violin and wind ensembles, an afterschool theater club and dance residencies with Ballet Hispánico and Arts for All. We are also partnered with Jacob Riis Neighborhood Settlement, which provides sports and academic afterschool activities five days a week until 5:30 PM. We are part of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project - this affords our teachers with rich, ongoing professional development to grow pedagogical prowess and provides our students with inclusive, culturally-sustaining literacy curricula. Our students have access to several different digital learning platforms, including i-Ready and myON, Staff members showcase the excitement for learning in our school by posting on our professional Twitter accounts to keep the community constantly updated. This year we launched partnership with Playworks, the NYC DOE Comfort Dog Pilot Program, and developed a school-wide Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) system focused on four behaviors: Practicing Safety, Acting Responsible, Working Hard, and Showing Respect. We also launched Check In Check Out (CICO), social groups, and utilized the social emotional learning program Sanford Harmony. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school did not make AYP in ELA and Math for Black ,SWD and Economically Disadvantaged students. These subgroups show an increased need for academic scaffolds and emotional supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One element of the Framework for Great Schools where we continued making substantial gains over previous years was strong family-community ties. School leaders and faculty have worked hard to maintain open channels of communication with parents and the community through monthly parent communication letters, our highly resourceful and up-to-the-minute school website (www.ps76q.org), and professional Twitter accounts (including @PS76Q) to showcase the learning and positivity in our building. This year, for the first time, we launched aFamily 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Fridays initiative where families were invited into classrooms to watch a lesson with a specific focus and then invited to attend a parent workshop about the chosen topic.We made two highly engaging online learning resources, i-Ready and myON, readily available for students and their parents. After listening to parents' wishes, last year we ushered in a mandatory school uniform policy, which brought a new sense of order and cohesion to PS 76. Funds were allocated to augment our Arts and afterschool programming upon parents' request. We now offer daytime instruction to students in visual arts, as well as both vocal and instrumental music. An extracurricular Wind and Percussion Ensemble and a Youth Orchestra were launched this year, in addition to a theater club, which culminated in a productions of Annie Kids and Willy Wonka Kids. We had afterschool residencies with Ballet Hispánico , Arts for All (incorporating poetry and painting) and enACT (addressing social-emotional learning through therapeutic theater and drama). We have also partnered with the Jacob Riis Neighborhood Settlement to offer academic, sports and arts enrichment afterschool programming for 80 students. Another element of the Framework for Great Schools where we continue making substantial gains over previous years was supportive environment. School leaders and faculty have worked hard to develop and implement a school-wide Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) system around four behaviors: Practice Safety, Act Responsibly, Work Hard, Show Respect (PAWS). As part of this system, students were acknowledged using PAWS Bucks for displaying appropriate behavior throughout the day. At the end of the month and quarterly, students could use their PAWS Bucks to earn entrance into preferred activities such as basketball, lunch with staff members, or for trinkets such as bracelets and pencils. In the Spring, PS 76 added Tier 2 PBIS supports Check In Check Out and Social Groups for a targeted group of students to provide further supports to help reduce problem behaviors. Staff also utilized the social emotional learning program Sanford Harmony to provide students with tools to improve communication, cooperation, and relationships with their diverse peers. This year PS 76Q was selected to participate in The NYC DOE Comfort Dog Pilot Program. Our comfort dog, Juno, has attended school three days a week to provide students with unconditional positive regard of a non-judgmental companion, as well as increased social opportunities with other school community members. Additionally, funds were allocated to partner with Playworks to help create a play environment during recess that fosters safety, engagement, and empowerment. We also continued our partnership with Brain Power to continue to teach our students physical and mental brain breaks, mindfulness practices, and social emotional wellness strategies to support a positive classroom atmosphere. Additionally, school leaders have communicated high expectations to staff through feedback given during post-observation conferences using Danielson's Framework for Teaching and during professional development sessions. High expectations have been communicated to families during family engagement sessions, which have helped parents understand their children’s academic and socio-emotional growth and readiness in preparing for college and careers. School leaders and faculty have continuously worked not only to align curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts, but to ensure that learning activities are as rigorous as possible and that instruction across all grades sets students up to build agency and independence. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q076 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 97 97 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 37 31 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 74.8% % Reduced Lunch 13.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 49.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.14 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 94 94 31 92.0% 0.0% 32.8% 31.9% 7.7% 2.2% 2 3% 7.4 33.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 NYC School Survey Report indicates that 100% of math/science teachers felt they had the resources to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. (Q17a), and fully 100% felt they had the resources to develop students’ conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context. (Q17c). Despite these resources, overall, 43% of our tested students scored Level 1 on the 2017 NYS Math Exam. Sixty-two percent of our Black subgroup scored at Level 1, 62% of our Students with Disabilities scored at Level 1, and 42% of our Economically Disadvantaged subgroup scored at Level 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5A – By June 2019, Grade 3-5 students scoring at Levels 2, 3 or 4 on the 2019 NYS Math exam will increase to 80% as a result of strengthening conceptual understanding in mathematical problem-solving through implementation of a new math curriculum, Investigations, and two pedagogical practices: Number Talks and Cognitively Guided Instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All students grades K-5 Investigations Staff Developers will provide support to teachers to strengthen their instruction in the classroom. Professional Development for teachers and paraprofessionals will be provided to help increase the focus on differentiated instruction. Teachers, in-house staff developers and administrators will facilitate math workshops geared to all parents on a regular basis throughout the school year; additional PTA Fun Nights with a focus on math will be facilitated for parents to provide them with strategies targeted to struggling mathematicians. Response to Intervention (RtI) will be provided for the lowest performing students in grades 3-5, including Black, SWD and Economically Disadvantaged subgroup students. Classroom teachers will sit with administrators every 4-6 weeks to review data and determine which students need RtI. All students grades K-5 Targeted math before-school programming will provide support for at risk students in grades K through 5. The Saturday Academy will provide added instruction for the students in Grades 3, 4, and 5 as they prepare for the NYS Math Exam in the Spring. All subgroup students will be invited to all these programs. On- and off-site PD will happen between September 2018 to June 2019; Parent workshops will occur 5 times throughout the year. September 2018 to June 2019: RtI will be provided all year long; Early Bird before-school math intervention programming will run from November to April; and Saturday Academy programming will run from Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Investigations Staff Developer, all teachers, and paraprofessionals. All classroom teachers, clusters, service providers, and interventionist. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement January to April. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, staff developers and administrators will facilitate math workshops geared to all parents every other month throughout the school year (October, December, February and April); additional PTA Fun Nights focusing on math will be facilitated for parents to provide them with strategies targeted to struggling readers. Additionally, math workshop will be the focus of Family Friday events in November, January and March; these events will give parents the chance to first observe their child's class while math is being taught and then debrief with the principal and staff developer about the strategic math pedagogical moves that teachers implement during math. These debriefing sessions will highlight instructional techniques used to SWDs and ELLs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To facilitate growth for our lowest-performing subgroups, Tax Levy and Title III monies were allocated for an Investigations staff developers, who will facilitate professional development across all grades K-5 throughout the school year. These professional development sessions will include classroom labsites, where teachers watch lessons being modeled, as well as one-on-one coaching sessions where teachers learn high-impact teaching strategies to move their lowest performing students. and get coached will they take a turn at teaching as well. Per diem substitutes will be provided to cover classes when teachers are at meetings/profession development sessions using Tax Levy money. Teachers will also be paid per session during the winter months to provide Saturday intervention exclusively for our lowest-performing students: Title I SWP, Title III and P/F Set-Aside monies will be used. Title I 1003(a) money has been allocated to provide summer math remediation and intervention programming in July and August. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. End-of-unit Investigations math exams will be used to assess students' readiness for the Spring 2019 NYS Math Exam. By February 2019, 75% of students will have scored 70% or above on all previous end-of-unit math exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Investigations end-of-unit math exams will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. On the 2017-2018 3 Year Level 1-5 Incident and Suspension Report the number of Level 4 incidences have decreased from 67 incidences in the 2016-2017 school year to 40 in the 2017-2018 school year. On the 2016-2017 & 2017-2018 Incident Location Summary: Level 1-5 Incidents Report the percentage of Level 4 incidences occurring on the School Playground decreased from 77% during the 2016-2017 school year to 19% during the 2017-2018 school year. 2. To continue building on this trend and to address the increase of Level 3 incidences, this year we are launching a daily school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) curriculum that will embed lessons from Social Emotional Programs such as Sanford Harmony and The Mutt-i-grees® Curriculum. We are also implementing Tier II Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) such as Check-In/Check-Out (CICO), At Risk Counseling, and Social Skill Groups. We will facilitate professional development to ensure successful launching of the curriculum and Tier II interventions and continue to provide building-wide social and emotional supports, including break corners in every classroom and the use of the same 5-tiered voice scale throughout the school. Behavioral data from the 2017-2018 school year shows there is a need to focus on Level 3 infractions. The overall Level 3 infractions have doubled over the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  past two years, growing from 43 infractions in the 2015-2016 school year to 86 in the 2017-2018 school year. It was determined that we need to focus on decreasing the number of Level 3 infractions at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of Level 3 incidences will decrease by 20 percent as reflected by Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Team will develop and implement a daily curriculum, embedding lessons from Social Emotional Programs such as Sanford Harmony and The Mutt-i-grees® Curriculum, with students to teach social and emotional skills.  Playworks Team-Up will continue to provide an on-site coordinator to teach, model, and empower a sustainable recess program that promotes inclusiveness and safety, for all students including our target subgroup students. A Playworks counselor will be in the building full-time one week every month. Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) Tier II interventions such as Check-In/Check-Out (CICO), At Risk Counseling, and Social Skill Group intervention services for students with Level 3 infractions who do not have mandated counseling. The PBIS team will meet weekly to assess progress of tiered activities and plan for benchmark events, such as kick-off (September) and celebrations for incentive earners in December, March and June. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students grades K-5 September 2018 to June 2019 All classroom teachers All students grades K-5 September 2018 to June 2019 All classroom teachers, administrators, service providers and school aides September 2018 to June 2019 Select classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and service providers. Students' individual infraction reports and incentive earners will be tracked. Those with Level 3 infractions will be targeted. --- 3b – Parent and Family Engagement --- --- --- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and members of the PBIS committee will facilitate workshops geared to all parents throughout the school year during Family Fridays in October, December, February and March. The workshops will focus on different curricular areas each time, as well as on de-escalation strategies that parents can teach their children in order to promote social/emotional skills at home. Also, the Parent Coordinator will provide Parent Training using the Positive Solutions for Families training modules developed by Center on the Social and Emotional Foundations for Early Learning (CSEFEL). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I funds will be allocated for Playworks. Student incentives will be allocated through the general school funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Patterns in student behavior will be tracked monthly. The PBIS team will review the number of Level 3 infractions and determine if further support is needed. As a mid-point benchmark, the number Level 3 infractions will be assessed in February to determine if we have achieved a decrease of 40%. The action plan will be modified and adjusted as necessary after the benchmark assessment to ensure the number of number of Level 3 infractions will decrease by 40% by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3 Year Level 1-5 Incident & Suspension report from OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past two years, PS 76 has sent staff members to professional developments focused on the Hallmarks of advanced literacies and sessions with Staff Developers from Teacher's College. All teachers have engaged in Learning Walks focused on TC Bottom Lines and Advanced Literacy Hallmark 4 (studying a small set of high-utility vocabulary). As a result, the number of observations evaluated Effective or Highly Effective using the Danielson rubric has increased in every component, with staff showing the greatest increase in component 3c (Engaging students in learning). During the 2016-2017 school year, 69% of observations were rated Effective or Highly Effective for component 3c, but increased to 80% during the 2017-2018 school year. Despite this growth, during the 20`17-2018 school year 23% of teachers rated Developing or Ineffective in Danielson component 3b. To continue to develop our staff, vertical teacher teams will engage in sequential professional development session and corresponding learning walks to ensure TC Bottom Lines and the Advance Literacy Hallmark indicators are in place in every classroom with focus on Hallmark 2 (Talk/discuss to build language and knowledge). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will engage in 4 professional development learning walks to grow their understanding of TC Bottom Lines and the Advance Literacy Hallmark indicators emphasizing support for Black, Hispanic and ELL subgroups. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom teachers and in-house staff developers will facilitate learning walks addressing TC Bottom Lines and Advanced Literacy Hallmark indicators. All Teachers Kindergarten- 5th Grade Professional Development Sessions with Staff Developers from Teacher's College All Teachers Kindergarten-5th Grade Professional Development Sessions with Staff Developers from Teacher's College All Teachers Kindergarten-5th Grade All year on a bi-monthly common preps, as well as select Mondays for Professional Development Sessions and Tuesdays during Professional Duties A total of 22 days of in-house TC Staff Development Days from September 2018- June 2019 A total of 30 off-site workshop days at TC Columbia University from September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Teacher Leadership Teams, and on-site Staff Developers Teachers College Staff Developers who will coach teachers Select teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited into classrooms for Family Fridays every three weeks to engage in lessons along with their children to learn strategies to reiterate at home by watching teachers make use of them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Two full-time on-site Staff Developers are paid through the general school budget. A staff development package was purchased from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, which includes 30 days of off-site workshops and 22 days of on-site teaching coaching, all focused on helping teachers amass TC Bottom Lines. Per diem substitutes will be provided to cover classes when teachers are attending profession development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 2 of the 4 learning walks will be facilitated. By June 2018, all 4 learning walks will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning walk agendas and sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After switching to Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study during the 2015-16 school year, ELA scores have been on the rise. Our school ranked in the 20th percentile among NYC schools in 2015, rose to the 26th percentile in 2016 and rose again to the 33rd percentile in 2017. Despite this upward trend, 42% of all Grade 3-5 students scored a Level 1 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. Looking at the data more granularly, 59% of Black students scored Level 1; 58% of ELLs scored Level 1; and 39% of economically disadvantaged students scored Level 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28 By June 2019, 80% of Grade 3-5 students (including Black, ELL and economically disadvantaged subgroups) will score at Levels 2, 3 or 4 on the Spring 2019 NYS ELA exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Fountas & Pinnell running record benchmark assessments will be used as universal screeners to identify students at risk of not passing the NYS ELA exam. These students will receive increasing intensive instruction matched to their needs in small groups or one-to-one setting, both during the day as well as before and after school. Teachers on each grade K-5 will administer Fountas & Pinnell running records Academic Intervention Team (AIT) will perform progress monitoring quarterly to examine student achievement and gauge the effectiveness of interventions. The AIT will meet with teachers to look at multiple data points, choose appropriate, highly tailored interventions, and set academic goals. AIT members and all teachers administering running records 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers will administer running records on a rolling basis all throughout the school year; three formal assessments in September, January and June will be administered and analyzed by teachers to provide targeted, differentiated support to students. Teachers September/October, November/December, February/March, and April/May Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Staff developer; the AP and the Principal Staff developer; the AP and the Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The families of students receiving RtI will be provided with information about their child's progress, the instruction and intervention used, who will deliver instruction and academic goals. Parents will also be notified of their child's access to myON and i-Ready in September. Staff developers and administrators will facilitate parent learning workshops during Family Friday events (about once every 3 weeks). Different components of balanced literacy will be showcased. Parents will learn about strategies for engaging their child in learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies have been allocated for teacher per session for pedagogues who work before or after contractual time to provide RtI services in small groups. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January and February Fountas & Pinnell running record data will be used to assess how many students are reading on benchmark. By February, 80% of all Grade 3-5 students should be reading on benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & Pinnell running records will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have worked hard to maintain very strong family and community ties that have been established in the last three years using a three-pronged approach: the crafting regular parent communication letters; the design and launch of an informative new school website (www.ps76q.org); and the set up of professional Twitter accounts (including @PS76Q) to showcase the learning and positivity in our building. Administrators promote an open-door policy to ensure parents have a voice, inviting dialogue at any time. In response to parents' wishes, before- and after-school programs are being launched to engage students in a variety of rich, stimulating activities while providing simultaneous homework support and Common Core-aligned ELA and math curricular activities. Additionally, last year we launched Family Fridays, an event where family members were invited directly into classrooms during first period to observe instruction and classroom routines; one area of focus was spotlighted during each event (dialogue in math, read aloud with higher-order thinking questions, writing workshop, etc), and then parents were invited to a workshop with the principal during 2nd period to debrief on what they just observed and learn about strategies to use to ensure continuous learning at home. The 2018 NYC School Survey indicates that 94% of families feel the school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn (Q1a) and 97% of families agree that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child (Q1b). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  However, the 2018 NYC School Survey indicated that only 75% families felt they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (Q4a). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the number of explicit parent volunteer opportunities will increase to a total of 20 as reflected in the parent engagement calendar of events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A clear vision of building strong family-community ties through parent volunteer opportunities will be communicated robustly through backpacked flyers, Twitter sharing, and general announcements at all parent events. Numerous types of volunteering will be offered, from helping in the lunch room and at recess, reading stories to a class, assisting during before and after school clubs and at major school events. The Parent Coordinator will track Black, SWD, ELL and Economically Disadvantaged subgroup parents to bolster their participation in volunteer opportunities. Monthly PTA meetings will be held. Title I parent meeting will offer parents the opportunity to present their ideas for school wide improvement. Upcoming volunteer opportunities will be announced and parents will have a voice in suggesting other volunteer opportunities. Translation services provided. Meet the Teacher is held in September from 4:30 – 7:30 pm. Parent Teacher Conferences are held in the November, March and May. Parent Engagement sessions are held each Tuesday from 7:20-8:00 am. Translation services provided. Parents are invited to all school events such as the Annual Holiday Sing Along, Multicultural Festival, and Field Day. All of these represent opportunities for parents to volunteer. Family Fridays will be held about once every three weeks. Parent will be invited in during 1st period to observe a showcase subject area being taught and will then be invited to a Parent Learning session in which strategies for addressing home learning in the same subject area will be addressed. Opportunities for parent volunteering will be announced and parents will have a voice in suggesting other opportunities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All parents of students in Grades Pre-K - 5 September 2018o June 2019 All classroom teachers, PTA, SLT Members, School Administrators All parents of students in Grades Pre-K - 5 September 2018 to June 2019 The PTA executive board and all parents of students Pre-K -5 All parents of students in Grades Pre-K - 5 September 2018 to June 2019 All classroom teachers, PTA, Parent Coordinator, ESL teachers, PE teachers, music teacher All parents of students in Grades Pre-K - 5 September 2018 to June 2019 All classroom and cluster teachers, staff developers and Peer Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, parent coordinator, pupil accounting secretary and school aides are paid through the general school budget. PTA executive board volunteers to assist at events. PTA financially supports annual events. Title I money is used to support these activities. Title III money supports ESL workshops. Per session will be paid to teachers presenting to parents during afterschool hours for Common Core workshops and ELA and Math strategy workshops for families of ELLs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, as a mid-point benchmark, at least 10 parent volunteer opportunities will be clearly communicated to parents. Parent attendance sign-in sheets will be used to track volunteers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance sign-in sheets will be used in combination with pre- and post-workshop questionnaires. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-on-one and small-group work is convened daily during reading and writing workshop. K-5 students spend a minimum of 45 minutes per week on i-Ready for ELAsupport targeted at their level. Phonics instruction occurs on a daily basis. Saturday tutorials for ELLsand for NYStest-takers will be provided in winter and spring. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Classroom teachers will use monthly assessments including Fountas & Pinnellrunning records, writing samples and Teachers College Reading and Writing performance tasks to determine the students who are at- risk. Spring 2018 ELAscores will be used to place students in Grades 3-5 in RtI groups. i-Ready software will be used to assess student mastery of Common Core Standards in ELA. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The Academic Intervention Teamidentifies the students at risk. Teachers meet with the AIT to discuss action plans for students not meeting benchmarks. This happens on a rolling basis from October to June. Academic progress is reassessed after a child has received RtI services for 6 weeks. Tailored small-group work including Spires, Leveled Literacy Intervention and Great Leaps is used for students reading below benchmark reading levels in grades K-5. Teachers College Reading and Writing strategy groups are used to augment specific reading and writing skills. The SETSSteacher sees groups of students with ELAmandates on their IEPs. Intervention teachers implement tailored small group work for students reading below benchmark and who scored Level 1 on the 2018 ELA. Small-group instruction is provided on a daily basis during in TC reading and writing workshops. One-to-one support is provided as needed for at-risk students. Peer tutoring between upper and lower grade students is provided during Community Service time five days a week three periods a day. General ed parasand push-in teachers add support as needed. Students spend at least 45 per week receiving i-Ready 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Mathematics Classroom teachers use the Investigations Prerequisite Inventory and Beginning-of-Year Assessments to identifyat-risk students. i-Ready softwarehas been purchased to monitor student progress in meeting Common Core math standards throughout the year. Science The science clusters in combination with the classroom teachers will identify the at-risk students. ELAinstruction online. Small group instruction is provided on a daily basis during in math workshop. One to one support is provided as needed for at-risk students. Peer tutoring between upper and lower grade students is provided during Community Service time five days a week three periods a day. Push-in teachers add support as needed. Computer teachers provide assistance to the students as well as providing valuable data to the teachers. One-on-one and small-group work is convened daily in classrooms during math workshop. K-5 students spend a minimum of 45 minutes per week engaged in i-Ready math instruction, which meets individual students at their target level. Peer tutoring takes place daily during three periods a day. Saturday tutorials for ELLs will be provided in the winter and spring. Saturday tutorials for students in Grades 3-5 will be provided in the spring. Small group instruction is provided by classroom teacher. During school day – 1 period / 3 times a week day – grades K– 5 One to one support is provided as needed for at-risk students. Saturday tutorials for ELLs will be provided. The Academic Intervention Teamidentifiesstudents at risk. Teachers present on students not meeting benchmarks on a rolling basis from October to June. . Small groups are convened daily to address skills deficits in math workshop. Skill practice workbooks will be used to focus on student weaknesses. Implementation of word problem of the day to reflect the Common Core Standards. Students use i-Ready software to help improve automaticityand problem-solving skills. The SETSSteacher works with students who have math mandates on their IEPs. Remedial instruction in science by reading leveled expository text. Differentiated instruction and vocabulary development is used. Magnet themes help to enhance the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The classroom teachers will use the data obtained from the nonfiction units of study as well as the NYC SS curriculum tests to identify the at-risk students. The guidance counselors and the classroom teachers through student observation will identify the students that might benefit from counseling. instruction through more read alouds and written responses Remedial instruction in social studies by reading leveled expository text. Differentiated instruction and vocabulary development is used. Magnet themes help to enhance the instruction through more read alouds and written responses. Respect for All curriculum will provide character building and anti- bullying lessons to students. At-risk students are identified by teachers in collaboration with parents and administrators. Push-in teachers add support as needed. Small group instruction is provided classroom teacher. One to one support is provided as needed for at-risk students. Push-in teachers add support as needed. Small group sessions or one-on-one sessions during the school day as needed. Classroom and cluster teachers will provide full class and small group instruction using Respect for All lessons. During the school day – 1 period / each day – grades K– 5 Saturday tutorials for ELLs will be provided. During the school day as needed. Respect for All lessons twice a month. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 17 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Student in Temporary Housing receive guidance counseling and in-house mental health services through our partnership with Mental Health Providers of Western Queens. Our STH population has access to clothing (including school uniforms) and school supplies that are purchased with special funding. Metro cards are also provided when necessary. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff regularly reviews resumes to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. ● Mentors are assigned to support teachers. ● Grade level meetings are held to promote collaborative sharing of “best practices” during PD and Inquiry time. ● New teachers are given mentors to assist with classroom management techniques. ● Modeling of lessons is provided by staff developers. ● The personnel secretary will work with the HR to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We are a Teachers College Reading and Writing project school - this means teachers are being sent for professional development at Columbia University on 40 days over the course of the school year, and TC staff developers will visit our building on 22 days to provide coaching for teachers. Teachers will also receive Investigations math professional development to help develop conceptual teaching notions in order to provide students with a repertoire of strategies in math. Social-emotional professional development has been offered to 20 teachers this year from Power Brain. A PBIS team will will receive Tier I training all throughout the year and will turnkey PD to all staff members to launch a building-wide PBIS initiative this year. A full-time staff developer was brought on this year to provide constant support for teachers and paras, modeling lessons, facilitating inquiry and grade planning as well as targeted PD. A Peer Collaborative Teacher works as a part-time math coach and facilitates a New Teacher Forum to provide as much support as possible for newly hired teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). - Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). ● Pre-K teachers participate in all kindergarten PDs so to have a better understanding of the core curriculum. ● Pre-K teachers are provided with an understanding of the Pre-K Foundation for Common Core. ● Pre-K teachers inform parents of student expectations with regard to the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Pre-K teachers advise parents of the possible need for intervention services. ● Pre-K teachers incorporate more rigor into their program so as to better assist the students with the transition to kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers review student data at monthly grade level meetings ● Teachers participate in weekly Professional Development on Mondays. ● Teachers determine the use of interim benchmarks for assessments. ● Teachers meet on common preps and Tuesday Inquiry Time to discuss lesson plans, differentiation and increasing rigor in their lessons. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 202,227 16,979 69,560 57, 524 X X X X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5E - All parent involvement initiatives, including per session for teachers who help host math and literacy workshops for parents; Teachers College Staff Development Package, Staff Developer salary; Peer Collaborative Teacher Salary Sections 5A, 5B and 5C - Grade-level summer per session planning; RtI Summer Booster Camp Teacher Per Session Section 5A - Staff Developer salary Section 5A - Before and after school extracurricular and academic intervention per session programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 12,366 0 2,859,369 X - X Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local Section 5A - Before and after school extracurricular and academic intervention per session programming - Sections 5A, 5C, 5D - Teacher salaries, supplies, per session for academic support afterschooland Saturday programming 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 76, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Title I Parent Meeting will be coupled with the October PTA meeting in October 2018 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in the Title I, Part A programs and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the rights of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will conduct the meeting as part of their monthly PTA scheduled meeting. This will be held at a convenient time so that as many parents as possible will be able to attend. The school will send home a notice to invite all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs to attend. Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Provide information to parents of participating students, in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. Parental Involvement and School Quality Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulations (67 Fed. Reg. 71710, December 2, 2002). Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least math and English language arts. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing and timely way. Involve parents in the joint development of any school wide program, in an organized, ongoing and timely way. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 76, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  This is an agreement between the William Hallet School, PS 76Q and the parents of the students participating in activities, services and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act This School-Parent Compact is in effect during the 2018– 2019 school year. PS 76Q will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and show academic achievement on the NYS Assessments as follows: PS 76 will hire the most qualifies teachers available in each license area. PS 76 will support their teachers with effective professional development. PS76 will foster open communication with all parents re: the progress of their children. PS 76Q will: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows : Parents may go for training and become a “Learning Leader”. Parents are urged to become a “class partner” that can assist when needed (e.g. celebrations / performances), escort classes on trips and by appointment can observe the class. Parents are encouraged to join and support the PTA. Parents are encouraged to attend monthly SLT meetings. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: Reports are sent home via report cards, progress reports, individual daily reports as well as letters from the Chancellor. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: All parents are free to meet with any teacher before school, on the teacher’s preparation period during the school day or on Tuesdays between 7:20-8:00 am. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held in November, March and May and on an individual basis on Tuesdays from 7:20-8:00 pm. Also Meet the Teacher will be held in September. We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitoring attendance ● Making sure that homework is completed ● Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education ● Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time ● Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate. ● Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, The District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Leadership Team or other school advisory or policy groups. ● Furnishing the school with correct blue emergency contact card information, including address, phone numbers and emergency contact person(s). ● Always informing the school when my phone number is changed. III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement so as to meet the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: ● Do my homework every day and ask for help when I need to ● Read between 20 and 30 minutes every day outside of the regular school day ● Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information given to me from my school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● Follow the NYC DOE Citywide Behavior Expectations Guide. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At PS 76, we continue to provide both integrated ENL and direct instruction supplemental programs, including targeted lessons for ELLs using the integrated and stand-alone models. Many ELLs are serviced through our dual language program in Kindergarten through 2nd grade, and we have TESOL-certified classroom teachers covering ELL mandates in Kindergarten, 2nd grade, 3rd grade, 4th grade and 5th grade. One certified ENL teacher provides ENL instruction for students in 1st grade in accordance to the hours of service required for each individual student's proficiency level. Two certified bilingual teachers will provide ENL and Special Ed services for first through fifth grades. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT scores and the NYSITELL scores for Newcomers it will determine which model and number of minutes required to meet needs of each student. Within each of the program models teacher will use data trends to determine student needs specifically to support language acquisition using small group supports for vocabulary development while working on auditory, oral and written skills within literacy units. Differentiated instruction is also provided based on academic trends and data based on but not limited to, Fountas & Pinnell scores, Teachers College On-Demand assessments, i-Ready assessments, NYSITELL / NYSESLAT scores and teacher assessments of each student to support Common Core academic and language Standards. Stand-alone programs provide correlated lessons based on classroom instruction, while supporting language acquisition in small group settings will allow for intensive individualized instruction for students academic success and language acquisition. The before school ENL program is in alignment with data trends using various assessments such as, Fountas & Pinnell, Teachers College assessments, i-Ready, NYSITELL / NYSESLAT scores and teacher feedback to determine best practices to support language acquisition for ELLs in the morning program using small groups to support the four modalities, listening, speaking, reading and writing in the content area . Daily attendance is recorded and all parent notifications are sent in the parents' preferred language. The program is available for all K-5 ELL students. Each group will include 12-15 students with an ENL/Bilingual-certified teacher in the targeted language of English. The program runs from November through May, three times a week from 7:00am - 8:00am consisting of 2 certified bilingual teachers and 4 certified ENL teachers. ELLs will have access to myON, and Reading A-Z, online reading programs as additional home language supplemental supports. Based on the trends students will be grouped by grade and language proficiency for the before school program using Continentals New York ELLs for grades K-5 including vocabulary supports, TC supports, and other language supports. The Saturday Academy for the NYSESLAT is planned for 2 Saturdays in January, 1 Saturday in February and 1 Saturday in March specifically to support ELLs to help them increase their level of language proficiency. The small groups consist of 12-15 students with a licensed 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL/Bilingual teacher who will group them based on language levels and current needs based on assessments and teacher feedback. Students will be grouped by grade and instruction will promote student growth in the four modalities of English. The program will be in alignment with the data analysis conducted monthly. This program will be taught by 2 certified bilingual teachers and 4 certified ENL teachers. The Saturday program will consist of four days of 3-hour sessions from 9:00am-12:00pm. We will continue to use Continental's New York ELLs for grades K-5 and include vocabulary supports, TC supports, and other language supports to help students achieve success. Our rationale is that through these sessions, students will learn to build rigor and stamina in speaking, listening, reading, and writing to promote language acquisition. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development is provided to all our teachers, including those who serve our ELLs every Monday during professional development time. There will be a minimum of 30 hour-long sessions. The topics to be covered at the Professional Development sessions are based upon NYSELAT/ NYSITELL scores and monthly and quarterly language exams. We are able to determine that ELLs Teachers are trained in a variety of topics, including Questioning Techniques, Reading Skills, Teaching a Directed Reading Lesson, the Danielson Framework, Lesson Planning, etc. Specific professional development sessions will target bilingual, dual language and ESOL teachers necessary supports to help ELLs develop advanced literacy skills to become proficient in English. Professional development will be determined by administrators, teacher feedback, and data trends to determine which PDs will best support teachers to provide effective practices to support student language acquisition in the content area. The Principal and Assistant Principal assigned to our school also provide Professional Development and training for our teachers. ENL teachers provide several professional developments to all staff with regards to best teaching practices, scaffolding and ENL strategies in content areas. ENL teachers have received 8 hours of training in Teacher's College which they turn-keyed to staff. Additionally, ENL teachers have attended multiple PDs with regards to CR Part 154 and NYSESLAT training, totalling 24 hours. All staff members have received 36 professional development hour which focus on ELL strategies and procedures. Our rationale is that well-trained teachers create well-performing students. The Professional Development will positively impact student progress because it will allow the teachers to fully understand student needs' and provide the proper supports and scaffolds to meet the language acquisition needs of the students. Agendas and attendance of the Professional Developments will be maintained by the school's Staff Developer. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: One of the most important components of our ELLs' success is the cooperation and inclusion of parents in the learning process. To facilitate communication, we provide translation services to all parents including our ELL parents, based on parent home language communication preference. Our largest ELL population are Spanish-speakers, therefore, all school communications are sent out in both languages. Newsletters are sent out monthly in various languages to help communicate with families about events, and supports for their children. ELL parents also work in conjunction with the child's ENL teacher to develop home supports using online programs such as myOn and A-Z Kids. Multiple parent workshops are available for ELL parents to participate in parent workshops which are provided using interpreters. ELL parents receive surveys throughout the year to determine which additional programs, supports or workshops they would like to attend to support them and their children. Translation services are also available at all monthly meetings, included but not limited to, PTA meetings, all Tuesday conferences, the four yearly parent teacher conferences and workshops. ELL parents participate in weekly activities such as arts and crafts classes, seminars, cooking classes and entertainment activities. Providers include Cornell University Medical Center, Nutrition and Foodbank for New York, as well as qualified school staff. The English class provided to parents in school, is taught by qualified adult education teachers, not only provide English instruction but also allow parents to voice concerns regarding their children's education and specific needs. Our ELL parents work with the ENL teachers to organize various social activities, such as Hispanic Heritage Week, our Thanksgiving Feast, Winter Festival and our Multicultural Celebration, providing art, food, dance and social interaction between parents, administration, staff and students. We always encourage our ELL parents to participate in school activities and we do everything possible to make these activities easily accessible to them. Attendance and agendas will be maintained by the school's Staff Developer. Parents will receive invitations and notifications in their preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name William Hallet Borough Queens School Number 76 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Timothy Miller Coach Christina Rivera ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melisande Bolano Teacher/Subject Area Hyejin Rhee, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Veloza Velero, TBE Related-Service Provider Penelope Morris Superintendent Philip Composto Assistant Principal Fred Acquavita Coach Evan DiBennedetto School Counselor C. Chryssos Parent Jesse Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Simone Singleton-Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 488 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.32% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 2 0 2 3 3 0 3 4 5 0 5 5 2 0 2 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 12 0 0 0 0 0 12 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell for grades K through 5. The Fountas and Pinnell is used as a running record in order for us to determine the next steps for each child. We gain many insights from this asssessment process. Once Fountas and Pinnel is administered the classroom teacher reviews the assessment with the ENL teacher to determine and plan the support that will be given in languge and content areas. Classroom teachers articulate with the ENL teachers the levels the ENL children attain. The ENL teacher plans with the classroom teacher to provide the student with the vocabulary development and comprehension skills needed to continually move the child forward. Teachers also assess students using teacher created 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  assessments and unit tests. Additionally, for grades 2 through 5 the reading indicator is used. We also adminster to all grades mid year ELA and Math test as well as an Exit test in ELA and Math in June. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELLs is evaluated by how quickly our students reach language proficiency in the NYSESLAT as well as their performance on the NYS ELA, Math and Science exams. The performance in the State tests determines our success in meeting our AYP goals for ELLs. Beyond AYP, which focuses heavily on state exams, we also look at student portfolios and periodic assessments, such as Fountas and Pinnel running records that are administered throughout the school year to evaluate the language proficiency levels of our ELLs throughout the year. Additionally, Exit test with writing components are administered to measure students growth. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For students in grades K-3 data from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Go Math and 2 nd and 3 rd reading indicator assessments are used to determine if the child is in need of intervention services. For grades 4-5 we review the same data as the lower grades, as well as the NYS ELA and Math scores from previous years. Students who are deemed eligible for intervention services are provided with this service, which allows them to receive small group instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data we received from the NYSESLAT 2014-2015 scores 50% of our kindergarten students’ language acquisition levels have risen by a level or more. In first grade 25% of the students moved a level or more, while 50% maintained their level from the previous year. About 30% of our second grade students’ language acquisition was at the commanding level, while the remainder of the students’ maintained their current levels or increased by a level or more. Of our third grade students all remained at their current levels, while in fourth grade 50% of the students reached the commanding level and the remaining 50% maintained their current levels. 50% of our fifth grade students, who have now graduated, had their language acquisition levels rise while the other 50% maintained their current levels. There was a 3% decline in scores overall from 2014. Also, 15% of our overall ELL population achieved Commanding on the 2015 NYSESLAT. We learned by administering the 2015 NYSESLAT assessment that we need to train ourselves in questioning children in a different manner. We will provide professional deelopment to all teachers and we will be able to assist when we push into the room, when we have articulation time, and during our planning time. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is delivered to the student using the Standalone and Integrated models. Students identified as "Entering" will receive a total of 360 minutes per week broken down into 2 types, 180 minutes of standalone ENL with an ENL pedagogue and also receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are "Emerging" will receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL per week. This includes 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are "Transitioning" will receive a total of 180 ENL minutes per week. They will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or another content area. Students who are "Expanding" will also receive 180 ENL minutes per week. They will receive 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area of instruction. Students who are considered "Proficient/Commanding" within the last 2 years will also receive a total of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area of instruction. Students who are receiveing stand-alone instruction will be taught by a certified ESOL teacher. Students receiving integrated ENL/ELA instruction will be taught collaboratively by a common branch K-6 teacher along with an ESOL certified teacher. TBE lower grades will incorporate Spanish instruction during Science. TBE upper grades will incorporate Spanish instruction in Spanish Language Arts. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our Transitional Bilingual Education Program is a self contained 12:1:1 class for SWDs. It is taught by certified Special Education pedagogues with a bilingual extention who provide instuction to the students in both English and Spanish. Students who are identified as "Entering" receive 1 unit of stand-alone ENL (180 minutes), 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class, and a minimum of of 2 bilingual content area subjects per week. "Emerging" students will receive .5 units of study in ENL (90 minutes), 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes), .5 unit of study can be stand-alone or integrated ENL/content Area (90 minutes), 1 Home Laguage Arts Class, and a minimum of 2 bilingual content area subjects per week. "Transitioning" students will receive .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 minutes) of integrated ENL, .5 unit of study can be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ content area (90 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class, and a minimum of 1 bilingual content area subject per week. "Expanding" students will receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other content area (180 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class and a minumum of 1 bilingual content area subject per week. c. DL program. If applicable. Dual Language is not currently offered in our school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes are properly delivered in each program model and meet the mandated number of minutes according to students proficiency level. In order to ensure mandated minutes are delivered to the student, ESOL and Bilingual extention teachers are properly informed of their students levels and mandates. A schedule is then created in order to meet the mandates of all students instructional minutes in ENL, ELA, and HLA. Students identified as "Entering" will receive a total of 360 minutes per week broken down into 2 types, 180 minutes of standalone ENL with an ENL pedagogue and also receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are "Emerging" will receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL per week. This includes 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are "Transitioning" will receive a total of 180 ENL minutes per week. They will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or another content area. Students who are "Expanding" will also receive 180 ENL minutes per week. They will receive 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area of instruction. Students who are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  considered "Proficient/Commanding" within the last 2 years will also receive a total of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area of instruction. Students who are receiveing stand-alone instruction will be taught by a certified ESOL teacher. Students receiving integrated ENL/ELA instruction will be taught collaboratively by a common branch K-6 teacher along with an ESOL certified teacher. Students who are identified as "Entering" receive 1 unit of stand-alone ENL (180 minutes), 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class, and a minimum of of 2 bilingual content area subjects per week. "Emerging" students will receive .5 units of study in ENL (90 minutes), 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes), .5 unit of study can be stand-alone or integrated ENL/content Area (90 minutes), 1 Home Laguage Arts Class, and a minimum of 2 bilingual content area subjects per week. "Transitioning" students will receive .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 minutes) of integrated ENL, .5 unit of study can be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ content area (90 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class, and a minimum of 1 bilingual content area subject per week. "Expanding" students will receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other content area (180 minutes), 1 Home Language Arts class and a minumum of 1 bilingual content area subject per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELL students receive content area instruction by their classroom or cluster teacher, with support from the ENL teacher. These teachers collaborate to discuss how to implement instruction to meet the needs of the ELLs and provide the best strategies and practices. These strategies, which include visual vocabulary review and expansion, technological support and small group instruction, occur either as stand alone or integrated ENL instruction, depending on the needs of each student. In stand alone ENL instruction the emphasis is on preparing students for the content area instruction they will receive from their classroom teacher by focusing on the fundamentals of the English language and giving students the prior knowledge necessary to have success. Integrated instruction on the other hand, allows the ENL teacher to take a small group and work on the specific content area instruction being taught by the classroom teacher that day. Within each model the teachers are working together to allow students the ability to increase their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills while building on their Cognitive Academic Language, which will allow them to meet the goals set forth by the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers will also use the NYSESLAT to determine language of instruction in order to meet the needs of the students. For students in the TBE program the instruction is aligned to the standards as well, however this instruction is also taught in the home language, which in our school is Spanish. The bilingual content area licensed pedagogue collaborates alongside the grade team teachers within the building so that students are meeting Common Core Standard goals while working on the development of both their home language and English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Although we administer the ELE to our TBE students, the results are not applicable as many of our students do not read or write Spanish. Our TBE ELLs are evaluated in their native language throughout the year through formative assessments, which are determined by the licensed bilingual pedagogue. The ELLs in the free standing ENL program are evaluated mainly in English. Where needed, and if available, native language assessments are utilized for our newcomer ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Factors in determining differentated instruction include but not limited to, NYSESLAT level, Fountas & Pinnel assessment, IEP goals, and students point of entry. Time for language/content will be planned accordingly. SIFE students will receive additional RTI in order to assist students in reaching academic success. Newcomers will receive additional stand-alone time, in addition to their integrated/standalone minutes, with ENL teachers (Mrs. Rivera or Ms.Bolano). Developing students will receive their mandated service minutes, as well as additional in-classroom supports such as visual word walls, provided by the ENL teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano. For the Long-term ELLs we are working on building comprehension, as well as tier II and tier III vocabulary and grammer, in order to provide students with the necessary support to meet their academic needs. The former ELLs will receive integrated service minutes for two years after exiting ELL status. Students will receive additional supports in comprehension. All ELLs and former ELLs, up to 2 year after exiting ELL status, will receive time and a half on all state exams, as well as language dictionaries in their home language when applicable, as well as exams being offered in the native language when applicable. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPS. Our DOE monitors all service providers to ensure that mandated services are carried out accordingly. Spanish speaking ELL-SWDs whose IEPS mandate bilingual instruction are placed in a TBE program and are provided with instruction in both languages according to the percentage specifications for the program. The few students of other languages are accommodated with trained ENL teachers and Educational Assistants as well as one to one language paraprofessionals if needed. We are following the Common Core Standards and provided materials and accommodations for all ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our teachers are given time to plan as a group at all grade levels. During that time they review data, curriculum demands and scheduling restrictions in order to plan appropriate language development lessons for the diverse ELL-SWDs in our school. Our classroom teachers, as well as our ENL teachers, are aware of the particular needs of the ELL-SWDs and continuously collaborate to achieve the students’ IEP goals. Planning is done during common preps as well as on Monday and Tuesday afternoons in order to meet the needs of the ELLs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELL students below level in Fountas & Pinnel and state exams will receive additional Level 1 RTI intervention services. Teachers of ELLs will cycle through intervention team articulation three times a year. Teachers wll be offered professional development focused on the SIOP model in order to begin writing language objectives to accompany content teaching objectives in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. ESL teachers plan with each grade to align content ENL instruction to current classroom units of study and provide scaffold including vocabulary, images, TPR, realia, videos, and word walls. Classroom and ENL teachers will be looking at student work samples and other accumlated data during weekly grade level inquiry teams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Students receiving language instruction will also have an additional phonics lesson in Fundations and a TPR program called Sounds In Motion. Lessons will also include more realia in order to engage prior knowledge. Students will also use Brain Pop ESL and various other medias to assist students linguistic development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are currently experiencing great success with the programs and services that are being offered to our ELLs therefore they will remain in effect for the upcoming school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs. All notifications and letters are sent home in the parents' preferred language so that they can understand the programs and activities being offered to their children. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend our many social events throughout the year. These social events allow parents the ability to become 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  part of the school community and gain support from other parents, many of whom speak the same language. The school offers ESL classes for parents twice a week by Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano. ELLs and former ELLs are weaved into every classroom and make up a high percentage in our school. All students receive the same academic programs with additional supports from the ENL teachers, Mrs. RIeraa Additionally, our ELL students are given the opportunity to attend Saturday NYSESLAT tutoring in April and May, to help prepare them for the exam in June. All parents have the opportunity to join SLT and PTA. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students will also use Fundations and a TPR program called Sounds In Motion and Heidi Songs. Lessons will also include more realia in order to engage prior knowledge. Students will also use Brain Pop ESL, StarFall and various other medias to assist students linguistic development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our TBE program is offered to Spanish speaking ELLs. Within this program home language support is provided, but decreases as English language skills develop. For example entering students would receive 75% instruction in Spanish while Expanding students would only receive 25% instruction in Spanish. For students in the free-standing ENL program receive their instruction primarily in English, however resources are available to them in their home language. These resources include but are not limited to dictionaries, glossaries and internet translation services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL department collaborates closely will all service providers and classroom teachers to ensure that ELLs are receiving grade and age appropriate instruction. For ELL-SWDs IEP goals are reviewed as well, so that students can receive the services necessary to achieve their academic and linguistical goals. All instruction is a direct reflection of the Common Core Learning Standards and accommodations are made where needed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students will also use Fundations and a TPR program called Sounds In Motion and Heidi Songs. Lessons will also include more realia in order to engage prior knowledge. Students will also use Brain Pop ESL, StarFall and various other medias to assist students linguistic development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school offers a kidnergarten orientation for parents and students during the first week of school. This orientation provides parents with the opportunity to meet their classroom teachers and learn the curriculum of the year. Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano, the ENL teachers, also meet with parents to ensure that all parents of ELLs receive the proper documentation to complete the initial ENL process. The ENL teachers also inform parents of their language rights and assist parents where needed. Translation services are available to parents at all times. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time our school does not offer language electives for students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not currently offer a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Team meetings will be held monthly to keep abreast of the needs of the teachers and students. By having these meetings bimonthly the team can discuss the growth of the students to determine the professional developments that teachers need. Workshops will be provided for staff members in all content areas to assist teachers in understanding the needs ot their ELLs. Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano will privide such PDs to staff to ensure language acquisition is supported during content area instruction. Mrs. Stone and Mrs. Davi, our assistant principals are available to provide staff with additiional support if needed. Our bilingual teachers, Mrs. Veloza and Mrs. Vergara provide NLA instruction and support for students. ENL coordinators, Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano, plan and articulate with all content area teachers and support staff in providing ELLs with the proper resources. The ESL coordinators provide professional development to all common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, bilingual teachers, guidance counselors, special ed teachers, psychologist, occupational/physical therapist, speech therapist and parent coordinator. Administration will informally observe ENL and bilingual teachers to provide feedback and determine the professional developments that are needed in order to best meet the needs of the ELL population. Additionally, teachers are given the opportunity to observe and learn from one another. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff is given the opportunity to meet with members of other school staff in order to better understand the transition that students will experience. Our current program will provide 15% ENL Professional Development to all teachers who work with ELLs as well as 50% ENL Professional Development for all ENL and Bilingual extention teachers to help provide proper supports to meet the needs of the children. Attendance will be recorded using existing school procedures and a record will be kept in ELL Critical Documents folder located in the ENL department office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are encouraged to set up meetings with both the ENL, classroom and cluster teachers on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement time, parent teacher conference days, quartly progress meetings and any other scheduled meetings. In the event that a parent is unable to attend a meeting during these sessions they are encouraged to contact the teacher and schedule a meeting for a time that is more convenient for them. Whenever possible the ENL teacher will sit in on meetings with classroom teachers, so that all language development progress can be discussed in relation to content area instruction. For parents wishing to have the meeting in their home language our school has staff which can provide translation services, however for parents whose preferred language is something other than the ones provided by school personal then The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted. Attendance will be recorded using existing school procedures and a record will be kept in ELL Critical Documents folder located in the ENL department office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S 76 we believe that parent involvement is an integral part of student success, therefore we always encourage our parents to participate in school activities such as arts and crafts programs with their children, PTA holiday sales, Family Cookshop classes, family fun nights, trips and other social events. In addition we provide our parents with many educational opportunities as well. Parents of ELLs have the opportunity to attend bi-weekly English language classes with Mrs. Rivera and Ms. Bolano. Additionally there is a Saturday computer program in place for parents to learn valuable technological skills. These activities allow parents the opportunity to be a part of the school community and interact not only with teachers, but administration and other faculty members as well. Parent suggestions are always encouraged for additional programs and services. Parent coordinator reaches out to families to inform them of all upcoming events to increase their capcaity to assist in their child's education. Communication takes place through school wide call messanger, a text messaging service, emails and fliers backpacked home. We follow the NYC Language Interpretation Services and they are always made available to parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Timothy Miller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William Hallet School DBN: 30Q076 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Timothy Miller Lisa Stone Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Christina Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Joyce Davi Other Assistant Principal Melisande Bolano Other ENL Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q076 School Name: William Hallet Superintendent: Philip Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator, ENL Coordinator No Yes (*Primary)Christina Rivera * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When we receive new admits, parents will fill out a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) with the ENL pedagogue and the parent will select their preferred language of communication as well as write it on the Student Emergency Contact card. Annually, parents receive a Student Emergency Contact card and parents are asked what language they prefer to communicate with staff orally and written. The Pupil Secretary will then put in the language preference into ATS – Updated Parent/Adult Info (PARU) and change it accordingly at parents request. Staff are informed of the parent language preference for their students by receiving a copy of the ATS RAPL sheet. Annually parents are given a survey to fill out to determine their language and support needs. Workshops are organized by the principal, LAC and Parent Coordinator to meet parent needs. Annually, parents receive a Student Emergency card and parents are asked what language they prefer to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  communicate with staff orally and written. Once the blue card is returned to the school our Pupil Secretary will then put in the language preference into ATS. Staff are then informed of the parent language preference for their students. New admits to the school will fill out a Home Language Identification Survey with the ENL pedagogue and the parent will select their preferred language of communication as well as on the Student Emergency Contact card. Parents are given a survey to fill out yearly to determine their needs. Workshops are organized to meet these needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 287 parents prefer written English communications with the school. 287 parents prefer written English communications with the school. 92 parents prefer written Spanish communications with the school. 6 parents prefer written Bengali communications with the school. 6 parents prefer written Arabic communications with the school. 2 parents prefer written Chinese communications with the school. 1 parent prefers written Armenian communications with the school. 72.84% 23.35% 1.52% 1.52% 0.51% English Spanish Bengali Arabic Chinese 299 parents prefer oral English communications with the school. 75.89% 82 parents prefer oral Spanish communications with the school. 5 parents prefer oral Bengali communications with the school. 6 parents prefer oral Arabic communications with the school. 2 parents prefer oral Chinese communications with the school. 0 parents prefer oral Armenian communications with the school. 20.81% 1.27% 1.52% 0.51% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Armenian 0.25% 0% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parents Bill of Rights Annually School Calendars , Grade Newsletters, and Food Menus Monthly Parent Notifications (i.e. field trips, photography release forms, student supply list, activities, parent engagement, etc.) Periodically Individualized Education Plan (IEP) Notices Annually Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE provides translated copes on the DOE Intranet site. School-based bilingual staff provide translations, they are given 1-2 weeks to translate documents. School-based bilingual staff provide translations, they are given 1-2 weeks to translate documents. When necessary, documents are sent to the DOE contracted vendor for further translations. DOE provides translated copies on the DOE Intranet site. When necessary, documents are sent to the DOE contracted vendor for further translations. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Nights and Parent Teacher Conferences Quarterly Parent Engagement Meetings Weekly ENL Yearly Progress Meetings Annually PTA Meetings Monthly interpretation service(s)? School-based bilingual staff members, T&I Unit, and DOE contracted vendors. School-based bilingual staff members, T&I Unit, and DOE contracted vendors. School-based bilingual staff members, T&I Unit, and DOE contracted vendors. School-based bilingual staff members, T&I Unit, and DOE contracted vendors. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency parents will be contacted immediately using a copy of the updated RAPL which will be available in the Main Office, Nurse’s Office, Teacher Emergency Folder’s and the School Emergency Go Bags along with the phone number for the DOE contracted vendor, Interpretation Services (800-231-0288) which is available for immediate interpretations. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will receive a yearly memo on the importance of language access. Staff will receive a copy of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, a copy of RAPL, and a translation survey will also be distributed to staff to identify school-based bilingual staff. Staff will then receive a copy of the school-based bilingual staff available for translation/interpretations. Staff will be advised how to receive immediate translations and interpretations and how to use T&I unit for service when they plan ahead. New staff and staff who need further assistance will contact the school LAC for support and guidance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Parents are properly notified about the translation and interpretation services available to them because they are immediately greeted by a colorful poster size multicultural Welcome Poster. Language Identification Guides are visible and available for parents at the security desk as well as the main office. During a professional development the Language Access Coordinator will provide training to school staff members, they will receive a copy of the Language Palm Card and the number for the DOE contracted vendor to use with parents during conferences. All parents receive a translated copy of the Parent's Bill of Rights in September. Parents also received a copy of a Parent's Guide to Language Access. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, staff often speak with parents to make sure they are satisfied. Staff also receive parent feedback during the annual parent survey. Staff will send out translated copies of a Language Access Survey to all parents/adults on the RAPL in December and make improvements to further support families and a final survey in June to prepare and improve language services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 
