2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q085 School Name: P.S. 085 JUDGE CHARLES VALLONE Principal: ANN GORDON-CHANG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS85Q 343000010085 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 30Q085 23 – 70 31 st Street Astoria, NY 11105 718 278-3630 718 278 8312 Phone Number: Fax: Ann Gordon Chang agordon@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Ann Gordon Chang Leah Lin Sheryl Dillon Parents’ Association President: Ann Gordon-Chang, Leah Lin SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Janet Talvy NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 391-8323 Phone Number: 718 391-6147 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Queens North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: 917 225 2020 Phone Number: 917 225 2020 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ann Gordon Chang Leah Lin Sheryl Dillon Vienna Ferreri Janet Talvy N/A N/A Tina Papamichael-Molos Irene Moutselos Peter Tsimis Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Carmen Guerra-Yonks William Keusch Joshua James EmiHaxhiu Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at Public School 85 Queens is to create a nurturing environment which fosters academic and social achievement for all students. We acknowledge the uniqueness of every child within our school community by encouraging self-respect and respect for all. Our school infuses technology and the arts in engaging students in their learning. Excellence is our aim as we strive toward developing well-rounded, life-long learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 85Q, the Judge Charles J. Vallone school, is a Pre-K through 5 School in Astoria, Queens. It serves a population of 545 children from culturally diverse backgrounds. The community is home to immigrants from many countries. Ten percent of the students in grades K-5 are English Language Learners (ENLs). Thirteen percent of the students have Individual Education Plans (IEPs). PS85Q has District Gifted and Talented classes in the Kindergarten to third grade. Citywide Gifted and Talented classes are presently in the fourth and fifth grades.  The school is a well-maintained, 110-year-old main building with an auditorium that has been upgraded with fully integrated media, plus eight transportable classrooms.  P.S. 85Q maintains its vision to provide high-quality, data-driven, differentiated instruction. Administrators and teachers collaborate to design and implement a comprehensive academic program that meets the needs of all students.  PS85Q provides a Schoolwide Enrichment program provided to all students through high levels of engagement and the use of enjoyable and challenging learning experiences that are constructed around students' interests, learning styles, and preferred modes of expression.  Data analysis and planning are supported by ongoing professional learning. Grants and partnerships also  support enrichment professional learning school wide. i-Ready Diagnostic and Predictive Assessments drive a technology-based instruction that individualizes for every student in Literacy and Math  A strong home/school connection that emphasizes open communication empowers parents to participate in all aspects of school life. Written and electronic communications, regular meetings, workshops and celebrations encourage parents to be active participants in their child’s school experience. The School Handbook and important notices are translated into several languages on our school’s website. Parent breakfasts are a forum for round table discussions between the parents and the principal.  The comprehensive school website provides information and links to resources, while an email distribution list facilitates speedy electronic communication with parents. Partnerships that PS85Q has fostered to ensure our student’s fullest potential:  Cookshop  Enrichment Clubs  Playground (Trust for Public Land)  Technology – Common Sense Media Certified for Digital Citizenship  Awards Night  Parent Corps  Thrive New York  Noguchi Partnerships 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special populations within PS85Q are as follows: According to State Assessment Data our ENLs were more proficient in Math and ELA. In order for the students to continue moving toward proficiency, the school will focus on the ENL Writing Standard. According to State Assessment Data our SWDs were less proficient in math from 2017 10% and in 2018 8%. In order for our students to move toward proficiency in math, our school will focus on using mathematical practices for SWDs in order to become proficient using contextual clues to support their reading and writing in Math and ELA  English Language Learners: percentage of student population (as of end of 16-17): 11.6% Students with Disabilities: percentage of student population (as of end of 16-17): 12.1%  2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past year PS85Q has seen great gains in writing and science through rigorous instruction this past year. Our goal for the upcoming school year is to increase math performance through the mathematical practices and a more concerted effort to move our ENL population toward academic success. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q085 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 657 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 42.0% % Attendance Rate 40.0% % Reduced Lunch 12.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 29.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 45.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 59 55 93.8% 1.2% 13.4% 3.0% 17.5% 4.6% 2 0% 5.5 58.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017 - 2018 school year,one of the strengths within this Framework element for PS85Q was the collaboration of 5th grade teachers participating in the Algebra for All initiative which has increased the students understanding of Algebraic Concepts. Additionally the have collaborated with all teachers to include Advanced Literacy in Math. PS85Q’s priority needs for the 2018 – 2019 school year supports our decision to promote middle school and college and career readiness of students in algebraic thinking and computational procedural fluency in math schoolwide. Our state data shows that our students have made minimal progress toward proficiency. This has addressed out need to continue to support students’ abilities to read problems closely, attend to precision, engage in mathematical talk, and provide evidence in mathematical tasks. Teachers will apply advanced literacy skills to support student’s development mathematical practices through literacy. This will foster the development the communication and collaboration skills that support college and career readiness. State Math Assessments: 4th Grade: 2017: 58.8% 2018: 59.8% 5th Grade: 2016: 64.9% 2017: 54.4% 2018: 54.8% 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will focus on utilizing Advanced Literacy skills for all students, including SWDs and ENLs in order to build conceptual understanding and procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context of mathematical problem solving, 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will engage in ongoing Professional Development for Advanced Literacy. Teachers K - 5 Grade Students September 2018 – June 2019 K - 5 Teacher Teams Teacher teams will create, develop, and revise Mathematical pacing calendars to include grade specific math vocabulary for all ELLs and SWDs. All fifth grade students will participate in the Algebra for All program. The fifth grade math teachers will collaborate on the implementation of the mathematical pacing calendars. Engage students in mathematical practices. Supervisors Advanced Literacy math vocabulary instruction throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 15  Teacher teams will revise mathematical pacing calendars to address the needs of Gen Ed, Gifted and Talented Learners, and ENLs. Grades K - 5 Students, ENLs September 2018 – June 2019 Grades K - 5 Teachers Gifted and Talented Students Support Personnel ENL out of classroom teachers Paraprofessionals Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Grades K - 5 Teachers Parent Coordinator Paraprofessionals Supervisors School Aides Parent Workshops Math Newsletter Class Dojo Math Night Parent Coordinator School Messenger After School Algebra for All for Student Support 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 2018 to June 2019, PS85Q will engage families throughout the year and their support of Rigorous Instruction which includes parents workshops, parent newsletter, weekly Bedtime Math newsletter to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Grade K - 5 Teachers ● Out of classroom ENL teacher ● Two one on one paraprofessionals ● Administration ● 10 Per Diem substitutes ● 50 hours of per session ● Math excursions to support classroom learning ● CEI Math Consultants - 21 sessions ● Lakeshore Math Night 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. According to the Expectations aligned to the Framework element of Rigorous Instruction PS85Q will by February of 2019 have 60% of students engaged in the Math Exemplars to assess their growth. All teachers will have engaged in the following to assess student learning by: i-Ready Benchmarks   Go Math Assessments  Exemplars Library Summative Tasks Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) End of Unit Assessments, i-Ready, and ThinkCentral Assessments, and Exemplars. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS85Q's strength in the Framework according to our 2016 - 2017 School Survey 100% of families say their child is safe at this program (City: 98%) 100% of families say this program is kept clean (City: 97%)100% of families say this program communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand (City: 97%) The priority need according to the School Quality Guide:  75% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. (Q21f)  79% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). (Q21g)  74% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. (Q21h Source: 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide, Supportive Environment  PS85Q uses Sanford Harmony to support our students and school community in social emotional best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our Pre-K- 5 classrooms will participate in professional learning with Sanford Harmony in order to continue to foster a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers and where a strong home/school connection is promoted to improve support rendered by classroom teachers and PS85Q staff. The supportive environment will be measured by using the Sanford Harmony program where teachers will use social-emotional practices to relate to their students in deepening their student's understanding and performance in the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Sanford Harmony provides teachers with a set of tools to develop stronger social connections among students, and foster positive peer relationships that will enable students to thrive a school, at home, and as they grow into adulthood.  Responsive Classroom is a research-based approach to K-8 teaching that focuses on the strong link between academic success and social-emotional learning.  Promote home/school connection through our School Messenger application.  ASCD Professional Learning Modules and literature for Behavioral Management, ENL Instruction, and Differentiation. General Education Students September 2018 – June 2019 Supervisors Teacher Teams PS85Q staff and support personnel Guidance Counselor ENL SWDs ICT Gifted and Talented 2018-19 CEP 20 SWDs ENLs G&T General Education ● Teacher and Support Staff will align practice to support/ engage our SWDs and ELLs and G&T population. September 2018 - June 2019 Special Ed Teacher Guidance Counselor ENL Support Staff Supervisors Sanford Harmony trained staff Guidance Counselor Pre-K Teacher Helene Chin - Thrive Social Worker Ashley Kaippallil - School Mental Health Consultant Parent Coordinator Supervisors Teachers Guidance Counselor Support Staff FACE ● School Community will engage parents and guardians in best practices aligned with maintaining a safe and supportive school environment. Parents and/or September 2018 - June 2019 Guardians 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS85Q will engage families and their support through workshops for Social Emotional support is provided by Parent Corps from October to February weekly on Mondays. Circle of Security is provided by the Parent Coordinator in partnership with Vibrant and that takes place from October 2018 to June 2019. Parents are receiving support in partner with math through monthly workshop by the teachers and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding Source: Tax Levy, and Title I For teachers, paras and administrators Instructional Resources: Responsive Classroom Professional Learning ASCD Learning Modules Sanford Harmony Professional Learning Master Teacher Professional Learning Modules Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  By February 2019, 80% of our Pre-K - 5 classrooms will participate in professional learning in continuing to foster a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers and where a strong home/school connection is promoted to improve support rendered by classroom teachers and PS85Q staff. After 6-week cycles, Professional Learning will be measured by the Five Levels of Professional Learning Evaluation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent/Teacher feedback from Surveys, Attendance at Workshops, and Today's Meet. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide our school's strength relative to this Framework is within 89% of Collaborative Teachers of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities). The highest priority need from the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide at PS85Q is:  79% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together. (Q8a)  72% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. (Q8b)  69% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. (Q8c)  76% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. By June 2019, 5% of our teachers will experience collaborative learning with other schools. This will be measured by conducting a school created Professional Learning survey and 90% of our teachers will engage in collaborative planning to design instructional programs within their grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will participate in vertical and horizontal inquiry to continue Advance Literacy instruction across the content areas to their gen-ed, gifted, ENL and SWD students. Attendance, agendas, reflection tools and teacher surveys will be used to monitor progress. Teachers will work in 6 week cycles supporting each other in areas determined by a Google Survey. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Support teachers and paras in using Master Teacher PD Resource. Schedule Parent Workshops Schedule Teacher Talent night Classroom Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors Classroom Teach     2018-19 CEP 25  Instructional staff will align best practices with the needs of SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) and STH students (Students in Temporary Housing): Responsive Classroom, Mentoring Minds Flip Charts - differentiating instruction Inter-class visitations - focusing on best practices Classroom Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors Classroom Teachers ENL Teacher Classroom teachers 9/18 - 9/19 Supervisors Professional Learning communities - collaborating on best practices to support SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) and STH students (Students in Temporary Housing). Instructional Staff N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 2018 to June 2019 PS85Q will engage families and support by utilizing Classroom Newsletters, Classrooms Celebrations, Celebration Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement, School Messenger, Classroom DOJO. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Provide teachers with additional planning time within the daily schedule  Materials from ASCD 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, PS85Q should see an 20% improvement in collaborative planning ● Attendance of teachers to workshops and events Interclass visitations   ● Teacher Surveys Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance, Surveys, Checklists, Usage of Online programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide Survey PS85Q's strength relative to this Framework is within 86% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets high standards for student learning. The highest priority need from the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide at PS85Q is that 63% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials used in the classrooms Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in teacher collaboration on decision making and instructional materials used at PS85Q. Teachers will be given extra preparation time in their schedules to meet and plan instructional units. Teachers will also be given materials to review and engage in inter-visitations. Teachers will share teacher made resources and collaboratively develop resources to drive instruction. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Follow Professional Learning Cycle Protocols Grades K - 5 Book Study to guide them - Handbook for Professional Learning ENLs Teacher Created materials SWDs ICT and SWD instructors will collaborate sharing best practices through guided Professional Planning Grades K - 5 Utilize Mentoring Minds Flip charts specific to ENL learning and SWD students as teacher resources Data gathered from weekly walkthroughs and formal and informal observations will be assessed for alignment of school-wide initiatives. A minimum of 4 cycles of observations will be focusing on various components of the Danielson Framework in ensuring Rigor and differentiation of support material aligned with the needs of our students. ENLs SWDs Review observation data in Advance to assess what components of the Danielson is Effective and/or Highly Effective. Grades K - 5 Monitoring student work in alignment of schoolwide initiatives. ENLs SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers in Grades K - 2, and 3 - 5 ENL Teachers SWD Teachers Cluster Teachers ICT Instructors SWD Instructors Supervisors Administration September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 CEP 29  1 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Administration Grades K - 5 ENLs SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 School Messenger will be utilized in communicating with our parent/guardians. Parents will work collaboratively with the school to develop programs with support student goals. September 2018 - June 2019 Parent of students in Pre -K to 5, ENLs SWDs Parents will work on the School Leadership Team to develop the CEP and develop school goals aligned with school data. Parent Coordinator Parents Teachers Supervisors Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 30  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018 - June 2019 parents will be engaged in the support and understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies through School Leadership Team, Parent's Association, and Awards Night. Personnel: Administration, Parent Coordinator, and Support Staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ASCD Modules CEI Consultants Support Staff Per Session/Per Diem Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in teacher collaboration on decision making and instructional materials used at PS85Q. Teachers will be given weekly extra preparation time in their schedules to meet and plan instructional units. Teachers will also be given materials to review and engage in inter visitations. Teachers will share teacher made resources and collaboratively develop resources to drive instruction. Teachers will also develop instructional units aligned with school needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Instruments of Measure that will be used to assess this progress will be:  Teacher Survey  Observations  ADVANCE   Five Levels of Professional Learning Evaluation SLN Benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS85Q engages the community monthly with celebrations of our students, which include Award's Night, Student of the Week, Publishing Parties, and Newsletters. Our school conducted a broad needs assessment across our school aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element on Strong Community Ties and Supportive Environment with Trust. The data from the 2017 -2108 School Quality Guide indicated that we needed to improve communication with our parent community. The addition of School Messenger, an phone application used to connect with our parent/guardians shows that 45% of our staff have successfully engaged families with School Messenger. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, parent communication will have improved by 10% by comparing attendance at various parent events. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  From September to June parent workshops aligned with the parents will be provided to support parenting skills, understanding curriculum being used within the school.  Beginning in October, Parent Corps is a researched based program in partnership with NYU which will provide emotional responsive support to our families.  Cookshop will engage our parents with wholesome foods to promote good nutrition within a family style setting. Support families in making health choices specific to diet and nutrition. ENL Parent Workshops Workshops to support SWDs Literature to support ENLs and SWDs School Website Teacher Newsletters 4 Awards Night Math Game Night Parent Breakfast Literacy fair Class dojo Pi Day Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Community September 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors Teachers Parent Coordinators NY Cares Volunteers Parents of students of SWDs and ENLs September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Parents Support Staff ENL Support Staff Parents 9/18 - 6/19 Parent Coordinator and students Supervisor Teachers 2018-19 CEP 33  International night School website Bagels and Books Scholastic Book Fair Parent handbook Teacher newsletter science fair 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Begninning Sepember 2018 - June 2019 PS85Q supports family and community engagement through monthly student celebrations, providing families with newsletters, workshops provided by our Parent Coordinator, School Messenger. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Materials – Games e.g. Science, Math Games, Pi Day Museum (Museum of Math)  Trips to extend the learning of parents and students  Office materials  Maintenance of school website  Refreshments for parent activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, PS85Q should see an improvement by 2% in parental relations and communication through the following: Attendance of parents to workshops and events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 34  Parent Attendance at events, Parent Surveys, Today's Meet Transcripts, School Messenger and visiting website usage Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score Level 2 or below on i-ReadyDiagnostic Assessment will be identified as RtITier I Support. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Provide instruction using RtI strategies using Ready Gen Unit Assessments. ● Group students and provide instruction according to their IEP goals and objectives. ● More guided reading and writing strategies will be implemented. ● More practice in word study and grammar will be used in the classroom. ● Teachers use Mentoring Minds strategies. ● All classrooms have CCLS aligned libraries that includes literature of varying text complexities in the different content areas. ● Technology in the classroom will be used to differentiate instruction and assess Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● The classroom teachers and paraprofessionals engage in Tier I support using RtI strategies in addition to differentiating lessons, small group work, one-to-one student technology based intervention. ● Tier II with the classroom teacher. Administrator will assign Tier II personnel as needed. RtI material to be provided to Tier II support personnel: When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Tier I service will be provided during the school day by classroom teachers. ● Tier II AIS intervention is more intense academic intervention which includes RtI support from school personnel during the school day. ● Tier III services include push-in and pull-out services during the day provided by Special Education licensed teachers. Ready Gen Scaffolding, Tier II Staff maintains a Tier II file provided by PPT team. ● Tier III is when Tier II support is not sufficient and a student is referred for Special Education evaluation that can result in additional RtI intervention, IEP, and/or 504 for the placement in a more 2018-19 CEP 36  Mathematics Students who score Level 2 or below oni-ReadyDiagnostic Math Assessment will be identified asRtITier I Support. Science Students who score Level 2 or below oni-ReadyDiagnostic Assessment will be identified asRtITier I Support. student progress through i-Ready. ● The classroom teachers engage in Tier I support which includes GoMath, differentiating lessons, small group work, one-to-one student technology based intervention. ● Programs include i-Ready and GoMath ThinkCentral. ● Teachers use Mentoring Minds strategies. ● AIS implementation is ongoing through the following: Math, Extra Practice/Enrichment /Minute Math, Math Games, Rubrics, Problem Solving, ● Teachers in grades 3-5 utilize instructional materials which include GoMath focused lessons. All classrooms have CCLS aligned Math content libraries that includes literature of varying text complexities. ● Provide instruction using RtI strategies. ● The AIS team determines the specific alignment of appropriate learning environment to support student academic needs. ● The classroom teachers in Tier I support using RtI strategies in addition to differentiating lessons, small group work, one-to-one student technology based intervention. ● Tier II with the classroom teacher. Administrator will assign Tier II personnel as needed. RtI material to be provided to Tier II support personnel: Target Mathematics, Go Math Tier II Staff maintains a Tier II file provided by PPT team. ● Tier III is when Tier II support is not sufficient and a student is referred for special education evaluation that can result in additional RtI intervention, IEP, and/or 504 for the placement in a more appropriate learning environment to support student academic needs. ● The classroom teachers and paraprofessionals engage in Tier I support using RtI strategies in addition to differentiating ● Tier I service will be provided during the school day by classroom teachers. ● Tier II AIS intervention is more intense academic intervention which includes RtI support from school personnel during the school day. ● Tier III services include push-in and pull-out services during the day, provided by Special Education licensed teachers. Tier I service will be provided during the school day by classroom teachers. Tier IIAISintervention is more intense 2018-19 CEP 37  Social Studies Accordingly, Social Studies Scope and Sequence teachers create grade level assessments and those studentswho score Level 2 or below will be identified asRtITier I Support. AIS/RtI services specific to needs. ● FOSS hands-on materials and non-fiction science libraries are integral in supporting those students who are at-risk of not meeting New York State Science Performance Standards. ● Teachers use Mentoring Minds strategies. ● All classrooms have CCLS aligned Science content libraries that includeliterature of varying text complexities. ● The AIS team determines the specific alignment of AIS services specific to needs. ● Passport to Social Social Studies which supports differentiation and various learning strategies ● Teachers use Mentoring Minds Common Core Standards and strategies. ● All classrooms have CCLS aligned Science content libraries that includeliterature of varying text complexities. lessons, small group work, one-to-one student technology based intervention. academic intervention which includesRtIsupport from school personnel during the school day. Tier III services include push-in and pull-out services during the day, provided by Special Education licensed teachers. . ● The classroom teachers and paraprofessionals engage in Tier I support using RtI strategies in addition to differentiating lessons, small group work, one-to-one student technology based intervention. ● Tier II with the classroom teacher. Administrator will assign Tier II personnel as needed. RtI material to be provided to Tier II support personnel: Staff maintains a Tier II file provided by PPT team. ● Tier III is when Tier II support is not sufficient and a ● Tier I service will be provided during the school day by classroom teachers. ● Tier II AIS intervention is more intense academic intervention which includes RtIsupport from the IEP, SETTS, Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals, and/or any school personnel during the school day, extended day, and After School Academy. ● Tier III services include push-in and pull-out services during the day by Special Education licensed teachers. 2018-19 CEP 38  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Social Worker informal observations.  Guidance Counselor informal observations  Parent request for at- risk Services  Teacher request for at-risk services student is referred for special education evaluation that can result in additional RtI intervention, IEP, and/or 504 for the placement in a more appropriate learning environment to support student academic needs. At-risk services are provided in small group and one-to-one settings in accordance to their IEPs and/or 504s. ● Tier I service will be provided during the school dayby classroom teachers. ● The Guidance Counselor provides RtI support to students to support wellness. ● The Social Worker provides support to students aligned with their academic needs, in addition to clinical counseling services for students’ emotional challenges or difficulty transitioning within the school. ● The Speech teacher supports students with language processing difficulties to help them with their academic performance. ● The Occupational Therapist helps students to develop fine motor skills. ● The Physical Therapist helps students to develop gross motor skills. ● The Adaptive Physical Education teacher supports students who are unable to participate 2018-19 CEP 39  in a typical physical education setting. ● The Vision Therapist supports students with visual disabilities to help them with their academic performance. ● The Nurse provides health related services to students which supports their needs. This includes administering of medication, monitoring diabetic students, monitoring students with allergies and ensuring that students utilize materials appropriately. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 21 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS85Q provides our STH children with basic supplies, uniforms, PS85Q pays for school trips as well as provide them opportunities for after school, mid winter break school, and spring recess enrichment. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 21 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  STH students will be invited to after school enrichment programs to support their academic goals. Provide counseling by guidance counselor as needed. Engage parents in workshops focusing on topics like emotional responsive parenting 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers hired at PS 85Q for the 2018 - 2019 school year will be “highly qualified” as defined in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). Highly qualified new teachers may include: Teachers who hold Transitional B certificates, including NYC Teaching Fellows, Teach for America Corps Members, Peace Corps, Fellows, and Columbia Urban Educators and teachers who have NYS certification (CPT, for example) but have not yet been appointed by NYC. Teachers in PS 85 Q that are not new to the profession are also highly qualified. they have met NYS certification requirements either by: possessing a bachelor’s degree, a certificate to teach, and have also passed appropriate tests, or have demonstrated competence in the subject(s) they teach through an evaluation instrument that takes all aspects of teaching certification requirements into consideration. The school establishes a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and a review of New York State certification/licensing. PS85Q utilizes the NYC Teacher Finder Tool, HR Director and Job Fairs in selecting highly qualified teachers. Once we have a pool of applicants, all candidates go through a rigorous selection and interview process. Potential hires are brought in for an initial interview with a hiring committee that includes Supervisors and tenured teachers. After the initial interview process, those candidates who advance are invited to the school to conduct a demonstration lesson. Finally, the candidate participates in a final interview with our hiring committee. We discuss our professional expectations for any of our potential staff members and ask that we be provided with at least three (3) references that we may contact. Upon verifying the candidate’s prior work experience and professional conduct, we officially offer the candidate the position. In order to retain current members of our school community, who are considered Highly Qualified, we offer ongoing professional opportunities for growth and development, which includes a mentor teachers, buddy teacher, scheduled meetings with Supervisors to address the teacher's professional growth. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 43  ● PS 85 Q provides extensive professional learning that is ongoing and sustained in class support for all new teachers, and extraordinary support for all school staff, at the school building level. ● High-quality and ongoing Professional Learning for teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals (and, where appropriate, pupil services personnel, parents, and other staff) to enable all children in the Schoolwide Program to meet the State’s student academic standards. ● PS 85 Q will provide extensive and ongoing professional learning opportunities for all staff, including administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, related service providers, and SBST. Professional Learning offerings will include differentiated training to meet the needs of both new and experienced staff that address individual strengths and weaknesses, grade level needs, content-area focus, teacher learning styles, etc. There will also be support and training for administrators, parent workshops for families and specialized training for all school staff. ● Professional learning for staff will be coordinated in PS 85 Q by a Professional Learning Team, which includes the Principal, and Assistant Principal. ● The Instructional Leadership Team will work collaboratively to plan and coordinate their activities to provide a two-tier approach to staff development. The team will work with staff to strengthen their knowledge base in literacy and other content areas. ● The second level, to be implemented concurrently, will focus on effective practices in the delivery of instructional professionals. ● Teachers will show greater awareness of RtI strategies to use in the classroom for struggling students and students with special needs as seen in their planning through regular observations. ● Utilization of the PRIM and Mentoring Minds Intervention Strategies Guide to support teachers in differentiating instruction in accordance with the student IEP and at-risk students. ● Teaching candidates are hired centrally by the NYCDOE. As described in the NYCDOE Consolidated Application, this process ensures that all NYCDOE teachers meet State eligibility requirements.  Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our Queen's North Borough Field Support Center to ensure that the candidate holds valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed periodically by the principal and the Human Resources director who works with our school to ensure that every teacher's assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract highly qualified teachers to our school include: ● Frequent communication with our Queen's North Borough Field Support Center when vacancies occur. ● The Queen's North Borough Field Support Center Human Resources Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. The Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges to locate highly qualified candidates. ● The school participates in Central Hiring Fairs where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. ● The school establishes a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in the search of HQT candidates. 2018-19 CEP 44  ● The school engages in interviews with HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS85Q has parent orientations, Kindergarten Open House, Kindergarten visitations and provides families with literature to support their children in the transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten. PS85Q also provides a PRE-K support Social Worker to support families for a smooth transition to Kindergarten. PS85Q also supports the transition of our Pre-K families through a partnership with Parent Corps. Parent Corps provides ongoing workshops to parents focusing on social-emotional best practices and positive parenting skills. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  PS85Q MoSL Committee was formed which includes teacher volunteers from different grade levels to come together to discuss the Assessment used in the new teacher effectiveness system.  Professional Learning was also provided to the committee in order to thoroughly comprehend the teacher assessment system  The committee will then turn-key the information to the staff 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 45  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 252,932 Title II, Part A Federal 80,454 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 12,366.00 0 3,141,547 X X X . X 2018-19 CEP 46 Column B   Section Reference(s) Section 5A - Part 4b Section 5B - Part 4b Section 5C - Part 4b Section 5D Part4b Section 5E - Part 4b             Section 5A - Part 4b Section 5B - Part 4b Section 5D Part4b Section 5E - Part 4b Section 5A - Part 4B Section 5B - Part 4b Section 5C - Part 4b Section 5D - Part 4b Section 5E - Part 4b N/A       Section 5A -Part 4b Section 5B - Part 4b Section 5C - Part 4b Section 5D - Part 4b Section 5E - Part 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 47  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Judge Charles J. Vallone School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Judge Charles J. Vallone School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● Providing professional learning opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional learning, especially in developing leadership skills ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 2018-19 CEP 50  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● It is encouraged that teachers distribute a class newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Judge Charles J. Vallone School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 51  ● Using academic learning time efficiently ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● Offering high-quality instruction in all content areas ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ●Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional learning opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits 2018-19 CEP 53  ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 54 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials The rationale for the selection of ELLs&nbsp;for the After school Instructional Academy All students including ELLs, Special Ed, and related services receive instruction based on Begin description here: P.S. 85Q Title III provides English Language Learners (ELLs) with supplemental instruction in an After-school Instructional Academy. After-school Instructional Academy classes will meet the following months: January - March from 2:35-4:45. Group sizes will be maintained at 15-18 students per teacher. There will be a total of 3 classes for the After-school Instructional Academy serving approximately 50 ELLs and Commanding ELLs. There are: 1 third grade class, 1 fourth grade class and 1 fifth grade class. Certified ELL, Special Education and CB Teachers with training will work collaboratively and provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State Performance Standards. One ENL teacher will push into the After-school classes to team-teach the students. · is based on previous year's test scores,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;I-ready&nbsp;Data,&nbsp;&nbsp;ThinkCentral&nbsp;Data, and NYSESLAT.&nbsp; Using this data provides teachers with an understanding of the student's current level in English proficiency.&nbsp; This process also helps the teachers to understand the needs of the students and prepares work that will enable them to succeed. · the same curricula (i.e. Ready Gen and Go Math).&nbsp; · instruction for ELLs at the Entering and Emerging Levels. ELLs at the Transitional and Expanding Levels will receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction. &nbsp;Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. · will be one third grade class, one fourth grade class, and one fifth grade class. These students scored at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding&nbsp;Levels of the NYSESLAT. &nbsp;Commanding ELLs will also be attending the After-school Instructional Academy. The After-school program will provide instruction in ELA and Mathematics. Students will receive reinforcement in listening, higher order thinking, reading, writing, and grammar in ELA. In Mathematics support will be given on problem solving based on the performance indicators. · The&nbsp;language of instruction used in the After School Academy program will be English to support our students in grades 3, ,4 and 5.&nbsp; &nbsp;Home language support is also provided to students that speak Spanish, Greek and Arabic. · instruction.&nbsp; Rally&nbsp;materials are&nbsp; purchased for the After School Academy program which are specific to Math and English instruction and separate from materials used in daily instruction.&nbsp; &nbsp;General instructional supplies, such as chart paper, markers, assessment sophistication material, and certificates of achievement will be purchased.&nbsp; · Parents&nbsp;are notified of their child's acceptance into the After School Academy Program by letters in both English and home language if available. · handed to the Attendance School Aide wh0 monitors&nbsp;the students' attendance in the program. After-school teachers take attendance during assembly of classes.&nbsp; They are then 2018-19 CEP 56 During the day, the instructional programs will provide 360 minutes per week of ENL The Title III instructional program will service ELLs in grades 3, 4 and 5. &nbsp;There &nbsp;Supplemental material will be provided to augment English and Math  &nbsp;Studies have shown that multi-sensory learning greatly increases English level Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · proficiency in ELLs. &nbsp;Materials,&nbsp;such as leveled library books, large chart tablets, multimedia interactive software, visual and auditory aids and word manipulatives help students use various senses to listen, speak, read and write more proficiently, according to the New York Sate Next Generation Learning Standards in English. &nbsp;Teachers, upon arriving to the Professional Development, will sign an Attendance rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: PS 85Q Professional Learning programs will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the New York State Performance Standards and achieve higher scores on all State assessments. These Professional Learning sessions will be facilitated by the ELL teachers and DOE/ELL Support Specialists Consultants. The Professional Learning sessions will be for approximately 30 minutes during the Monday Professional Development time. These professional learning sessions will be approximately one meeting a month with all teachers. In addition, ELL teachers will provide one on one academic support to teachers of ELLs. · sheet and an Agenda provided by the ELL teachers or Support Specialist.&nbsp; These records will then be maintained in a binder in the main office. The ENL Teacher will provide ELL, General Education, and Special Education teachers with Professional Learning workshops on effective teaching strategies and practices. These workshops will provide a better understanding on how to meet ELL Standards and raise levels of English proficiency for ELL students. Topics which will be addressed during the Professional Learning are: * Identifying the ELL and developing interventions for the ELLs. * Using the balanced literacy model to meet the needs of ELLs. * Scaffolding across all curricula areas. * Collaborative planning on differentiated instructional strategies to meet the students' needs. * Strategies needed to prepare ELLs to meet the State Standards and to gain a clear understanding of Learning Standards of English as a New Language and the NYSESLAT. * Professional Learning will also focus on the assessment of the ELL student and how to improve the English proficiency and integrated content instruction. * Professional literature is also necessary for teachers to enrich their own development. Current literatures will help them create innovative teaching styles and exciting content instruction. Methods such as multi-sensory instruction, hands-on word activities, and interactive multimedia application software are just some of the ideas that stem from professional resources. Topics which will be addressed during Professional Learning sessions are as follows: *Scaffolding across the curricula. *Differentiated instructional strategies *Alignment of instruction with the NYSESLAT 2018-19 CEP 57  rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: PS 85 values parental involvement in the decision-making process. Together with the Parent Coordinator, we provide parents with an orientation that describes various programs for English Language Learners. This enables parents to make a sound educational decision as to which program best meets the needs of their child. In selecting appropriate placement for their child, the first official interaction with parents/guardians of newly enrolled English Language Learners is the Parent Orientation Session where program placement options are presented with clarity and objectivity. The meeting focuses on orienting the parents to the school system and explaining program options. A video in nine (9) different languages provides parents of newly enrolled ELLs into the New York City school system which provides information on the new reorganization and their right to choose educational options for their child. The video is available in: English, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Haitian, Arabic, Korean, Urdu, and Bengali. Parents are provided with brochures that explain the three program models: Transitional Bilingual Education Program, English as a New Language Program, and Dual Language Program. Additionally, parents are provided with an explanation of the Next Generation Learning Standards, the core curriculum, assessments, student expectations and general educational program requirements. In the lower grades and in the upper grades, parents of a newly enrolled student opt to place their child in an ENL self-contained or push-in/pull-out program. Students are placed within 10 days of enrollment in the appropriate program. There are a minimum of four parent sessions for ELLs during the school year. The Parent Coordinator will provide additional parent orientation sessions during the month of December and throughout the course of the school year for approximately 90 minutes. The meeting focuses on orienting the parents to the school system and explains program options, state and city standards, assessments, student expectations, and general program requirements. In addition to our parent orientation, PS85Q provides workshops for parents, individual meetings with parents to explain the ELL placement and how to provide support for their child. Throughout the school year parents are updated on their child's progress which include letters, phone calls and meeting opportunities when parents are available. Letters are sent to parents in their home language, if available, to inform them of the workshops and activities ongoing within our school. An attendance sheet and Agenda are placed for parents to sign and then maintained in the ENL Data Binder. During an after-school workshop, the parents of all ELLs are informed on the Instructional Programs available for ELLS, including Ready Gen and the Go Math Program, and how they will accommodate the needs of their children. In addition, parents are oriented on how they can assist their children with assignments at home and they will be given suggestions on activities in which they can engage their children in order to further enhance their skills. Workshops will be provided to parents of ELLs to provide them with support of Reading, Writing, and Vocabulary Development Strategies to help their children with the English Language Acquisition process. If needed, staff members will assist with translation in order to support families' home language. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. (3)(16)(3.5)(50.53) Teacher-Sessions-Hours- Rate (1)(16)(4)(52.44)Supervisor-Sessions-Hours- Rate N/A Instructional Materials to support the afterschool program N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $8,489.04 $3,356.16 N/A 1,181.82 N/A N/A N/A 13,027 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 30 School Name The Judge Charles J. Vallone School School Number 085 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ann Gordon-Chang Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher D.Vasilopoulos, P. Tsimis Teacher/Subject Area Tina Papamichael Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Vlassopoulos Related-Service Provider Daniela Piliero/SETTS Superintendent Dr. Phillip Composto Assistant Principal Maria Samolis Coach type here School Counselor Sonia Roselli Parent Parent Coordinator Margerita Kalis Field Support Center Staff Member Lawrence Pendergast Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 593 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 97 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The pre-assessment and assessment tool that the school chooses to use is the i-Ready assessment tool. From the data we have collected, we have found that the students needed additional support in ELA and Writing. With that in mind, the other tools that the school uses is Finish Line New York ELLs, Continental's New York ELLs, Award Reading program, Rigby On Our Way to English, and teacher-created materials to further determine and support the needs of the ELL students. The data collected from these resources ensures that the four modalities of Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking are addressed for each student. When one modality is needed, support is then provided. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers of ELL students meet with ENL Teachers, Demetra Vasilopoulos and Peter Tsimis, to discuss which students need to be serviced. Students are also supported by their teacher, as teachers prepare their lessons and include material from core content areas, incorporating the four modalities of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing.. 2018-19 CEP 61  With our content areas we have provided the following: The i-Ready program is geared to provide students with the support needed in order to achieve success in content and language development. Through the use of i-Ready's Diagnostic Assessment, students receive individualized lessons and support for successful completion. Results of the assessment are also given immediately and used by teachers to provide additional support and differentiated instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessment data is reviewed and discussed by classroom teachers, support staff, and administration to determine the needs and support to be provided to ENL students. All support provided will be aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards that will support student growth in order to meet the AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? According to the results of the data, we found that there is deficiency in writing across the levels due to writing being the final skill to be fully developed. The children need to develop vocabulary in reading and to be exposed to literature for a long time before they are able to use this academic vocabulary in their own writing. In order to address the needs of our students, we have the following in place: ENGLISH: We reviewed Baseline Periodic Assessments and New York State ELA *Note: Several of our ELLs are exempt from the Statewide ELA. We looked closely at ELLs (ELA Baseline Periodic Assessment), and at those who were tested by the State. Implications for Instruction: MATH: We reviewed the NY State Math Exams, ELA, and Baseline Periodic Assessments Implications for Instruction: SCIENCE: We reviewed the 4th Grade Science State Test, with the majority of the students scoring below or above grade level. Implications for Instruction: 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS85Q is a data driven school. Programs, such as i-Ready, ThinkCentral and the Wilson Program, help teachers guide ELLs with specific tasks. Once the student has taken the pre-assessment, lessons are then gathered to pinpoint the specific needs of that student so that they are able to achieve their goals. PS85Q also has a RtI framework that allows the student to cycle with the teacher for 6 weeks. Then after if the students needs further support in the classroom, they are given that from their teacher. If the students need to be referred, they are then referred to the PPT who then assigns the students to a teacher that will work with them outside of the classroom and with different material that supports their needs. If at the end of that cycle the students still need further support, once again they are referred to the PPT team for further evaluation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In all grades (K-5) the students performed better in the Listening and Speaking strands due to the fact that a large part of the instruction focuses on these two strands at the Entering/Emerging levels. Developmentally Second Language Acquisition begins with Listening and Speaking first and once these two strands have been developed to a certain level, the Reading and Writing strands are then strengthened. Studies show that BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) develops before reaching CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). 2018-19 CEP 62  The Transitioning and Expanding students did very well in the Listening and Speaking strands. Many are considered Commanding in these areas. As stated before, when the second language learners reach the Transitioning and Expanding levels, the Listening and Speaking skills are well developed. We further strengthen the academic language once they reach this level with the social language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The staff meets to share and discuss data that is used to address the needs of all students including the ELLs. Common Prep periods have been scheduled to provide time for teachers to meet with each other and supervisors to share best practices and be informed about the instructional expectations for ELLs. Monday PD in the school calendar has been implemented to provide additional time for Professional Learning and Inquiry work. In addition, the teachers participate in workshops that provide training on how to differentiate instruction for all students, including ELLs and students with special needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ENL students, including ENL students with special needs, receive all instruction in English using ENL methodologies for a specific amount of time as determined by the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test. a.)The ENL instructional programs include: Pull-out or Push-in models. PS 85 does not have a Bilingual program or a Dual Language program. b.) All students are provided with a high quality instruction in English as a New Language utilizing scaffolding strategies in the delivery of the lesson. The school has Push-in/Pull-out ENL programs in grades K-5 that provide services to ELLs . b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As a school we schedule the ENL Pull-out/Push-in programs and create classes to support ENL learners through grouping. To ensure that students meet the number of mandated minutes weekly, students are grouped according to: * their levels based on the 2017 NYSESLAT scores for grades 1 - 5, and * 2017-18 NYSITELL scores for new admits and Kindergarten. As per the CR Part 154 Requirement for English as a New Language, the students receive the following ENL support: Entering/Emerging - 360 minutes per week instructional time 2018-19 CEP 63  Transitioning/Expanding - 180 minutes per week instructional time Commanding - 90 minutes per week instructional time 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom environment for all ELLs in K-5, including students with special needs, is print rich and reflects evidence of rigorous instruction which is presented through evidence of growth in student’s work folders, portfolios and celebrated throughout the classroom. The classroom environment reflects the following: • Flow of the day to include language of instruction: duration of lesson. • A technology center – with software • Access to Instructional websites, for example: i-Ready, Mathletics, ThinkCentral GoMath, Vocabulary City, Award Reading, MyON • Leveled classroom libraries • Interactive word walls • Wilson Program • ENL teachers support ELLs through Finish Line New York ELLs, Continental New York ELLs, and Award Reading Instructional Programs as well as teacher-created materials that are aligned with the Common Core State Standards focusing on the four modalities, which are Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Not applicable. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, there are no SIFE students at PS85. However, ENL students who first entered an English language school system after two grades with interrupted, little or no formal schooling in their first language will receive the following differentiated supports: • Wilson Program • Computer interactive programs • Small group instruction by ENL teacher • Cooperative learning activities • i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction - Award Reading • ThinkCentral (GoMath) Teacher Visuals, Charts and hands-on activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The classroom environment reflects the following: • Flow of the day to include language of instruction: duration of lesson. • A technology center – with software 2018-19 CEP 64  • Access to Instructional websites, for example: i-Ready, Mathletics, Vocabulary City, MyON • Leveled classroom libraries • Interactive word walls • Small group instruction and individual support Our ELL-SWDs are supported by i-Ready Math and ELA computer intervention. In addition, we use the Intervention Program that is aligned with our ELA and Math Programs. Each child is provided with a workbook or laptop to ensure that learning styles are accommodated and different modalities are utilized. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are instructed in rigorous curriculum that sets high academic standards enabling them to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency by giving them the opportunity to be taught in the least restrictive environment alongside with ELL students without disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Title III after school programs are offered to all of our ELLs. ENL teachers provide support and additional instruction in literacy and math. The after-school program at P.S. 85 will assist ELLs in meeting the NYS standards. It has been designed to service students from grades 3-5. Experienced ENL teachers will teach the classes on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35 – 4:45 P.M. The program will be for ELLs and Commanding ELL students and will be grouped into 15 to 18 students per class. Instruction will be the focus with Intensive differentiated literacy instruction which will help these students to meet the standards. Our program will incorporate direct instruction in Vocabulary, English Grammar, and Math. PS85Q provides RtI strategies as intervention for ELLs in ELA and Math if a student is at risk of failing in Reading or Math as demonstrated by selected assessments, such as i-Ready for 3 weeks. If the student is showing minimal progress, continued classroom support is offered for 3 weeks. PPT approves for Tier 2 support. Ms. Piliero will initiate Tier 2 with the classroom teacher. Ms. Samolis will assign Tier 2 personnel as needed. RtI material to be provided to Tier 2 support personnel: Target Mathematics Target Reading Ready Gen Scaffolding Go Math RtI Tier 2 Staff maintains a Tier 2 file provided by Ms. Piliero. If the student continues to struggle, initiate referral process for a formal evaluation at Tier 3. Provide RTI folder for Ms. Piliero. For ELLs still speaking in their native language, translation is provided in their home language, if available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The i-Ready program will be used this year. I-Ready is a program that adjusts to the students learning ability, therefore creating individualized instruction based on that student's needs. 2018-19 CEP 65  Our ELL-SWDs are supported by i-Ready, Vocabulary City, MyON, Award Reading, and Mathletics. In addition, we use the Intervention Program that is aligned with our ELA and Math Programs. Each child is provided with a workbook or laptop to ensure that learning styles are accommodated and different modalities are utilized. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. PS85Q offers equal access to all school programs to all students. Each student is provided with workbooks and materials that align with the curriculum and the Common Core State Standards. Computer access is also given to each student through classroom laptops or the Computer Lab. The after-school school program at P.S. 85 will assist ELLs in meeting the NYS standards. It has been designed to service students from grades 3-5. Qualified teachers will teach the classes on Wednesdays and Thursdays during the months of January, February, and March from 2:35 to 4:45 P.M. Group sizes will be maintained at 15-18 students per teacher in Grades 3-5. There will be a total of six classes servicing students. Teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction will focus on Literacy, Mathematics and all other content areas using ENL strategies to help students achieve higher scores on the state assessments and NYSESLAT. I-Ready and Curriculum Associates Test Prep will be used. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are: Our ELL-SWDs are supported by i-Ready Math and ELA computer Intervention. Additional materials used to support ELLs are: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS85Q provides ELL students with an ENL program that supports home language needs with the use of Google Translate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All material used for the ENL Program is based on the level that the student tested into. After the pre-assessment is given, differentiation methods are used to help scaffold instruction to help the student build confidence toward reaching their goals. All resource material is specifically aligned to specific grade and age of the ELL students. For example, ThinkCentral, i-Ready, Wilson Program, and the ELL Continental and Finish Line material corresponds to the student's age, grade and cognitive level. This also incorporates the needs of our ENL students classified as SWDs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). An orientation is provided for all incoming Kindergarten students and their families during the month of May prior to their entry into the NYC school system. The teachers meet with the students and parents to discuss programs, curriculum policy, and initiatives. Margareta Kalis, the Parent Coordinator at PS85Q, reaches out and contacts the parents. The parents are then invited to the 2018-19 CEP 66  attend the information session. The video explains the three program choices offered to parents. Parents are also invited to watch the video in their preferred language. Parents are given the opportunity to watch the information session on the school website. At this time, parents are expected to complete the parent selection form. When the parents are unable to attend the session, they are welcome to make an appointment. There is also an attendance sheet for parents who attended the information session. If the parent prefers a bilingual program, the parent can choose to whether or not to keep the student at PS85Q, where we offer a free-standing ENL program, or to take their child and place them in a another school that offers a bilingual program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not Applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS85Q does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S. 85 Q Title III Professional Development program will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS Performance and Learning Standards as well as the Common Core Learning Standards in order to achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. These professional learning sessions will be facilitated by ENL teachers and school administrators. During professional learning all participants sign in on specific attendance sheets that are maintained in the office. Staff meets to share and discuss data that is used to address the needs of all students including the ELLs. Common Prep periods have been scheduled to provide time for teachers to meet with each other and supervisors to share best practices and be informed about the instructional expectations for ELLs. Monday PD in the school calendar has been implemented to provide additional time for Professional Learning and Inquiry work. In addition, the teachers participate in workshops that provide training on how to differentiate instruction for all students, including ELLs and students with special needs. The Office of ELLs provides Professional Learning opportunities to teachers and the ENL teachers to develop plans in order to meet the literacy needs of ELLs using research and school-based data. The Institute specifically addresses literacy models, program improvement, evaluation and federal and state education policy. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Administration, all teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, support service providers and the Parent Coordinator will 2018-19 CEP 67  participate in training. In addition, the Specialists will provide Special Education/ELL teachers and teachers instructing the Title III program with professional development on effective teaching practices for building academic language and strategies for improving content area skills, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). The workshops will provide better understanding of how to meet ELL standards and raise levels of English proficiency for ENL students. The Professional Development in ENL methodologies will include school-based Core Curriculum Team and general education teachers with large ELL student populations. The ENL Teachers will receive Professional Development to support ELLs and Commanding ELLs in Kindergarten through Fifth grade. Agendas and Attendance sheets will be kept in a binder for activities conducted. Topics to be addressed during this Professional Development sessions will be aligned with the following: • Developing interventions for their ELL students. • Using Balanced Literacy Model to meet the needs of ELLs. • Scaffolding across all curricula areas: Types of Scaffolding which support ELLs. • Collaborative planning on differentiated Instructional strategies to meet the students’ needs. • Strategies needed to support ELLs to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and to gain a clear understanding of Learning Standards of English as A New Language and the NYSESLAT. A second workshop series will provide Professional Development for general education teachers of grades Kindergarten - Grade 5 Topics will include the following: • Identifying the ELL and developing interventions for the ELL • Using Balanced Literacy Model to meet the needs of ELLs • Scaffolding across all curricula areas: Types of Scaffolding • Collaborative planning on differentiated Instructional strategies to meet the students’ needs • Strategies needed to prepare ELLs to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and to gain a clear understanding of Learning Standards of English as A New Language and the NYSESLAT exam. Workshops will also focus on assessing the ENL student and how to improve English proficiency and integrated content instruction. Teachers will also work with ENL Specialist and Special Education teachers to improve the skills of ELL students with Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). Professional literature is necessary for teachers to expand their own development. A Teacher Library of current literature titles, such as: Learning to Learn in a Second Language, and Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning by Pauline Gibbons and Building Academic Language by Jeff Zwiers, will help teachers create innovative teaching styles and exciting content instruction. Methods such as multi-sensory instruction, hands-on word activities and interactive multimedia application software, as well as, access to ENL-based teacher websites are just a few ideas that stem from professional resources. Topics that will be addressed during professional development sessions are as follows: • Scaffolding across the disciplines • Differentiated instructional strategies • Alignment of instruction with the NYSESLAT • Mathematical instructional strategies to develop and enhance students’ skills and performance on the state assessments. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 2018-19 CEP 68  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS85Q meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least two to three times a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. If needed, a meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. PS 85 values parental involvement in the decision-making process of their children. Together with the Parent Coordinator, we provide parents with an orientation that describes various programs for English Language Learners. This enables parents to make a sound educational decision as to which program best meets the needs of their child. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In selecting appropriate placement for their child, the first official interaction with parents/guardians of newly enrolled English Language Learners is the Parent Orientation Session where program placement options are presented with clarity and objectivity. The meeting focuses on orienting the parents to the school system and explaining program options. The video is available in English, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Haitian, Arabic, Korean, Urdu, and Bengali and provides parents of newly enrolled ELLs into the New York City school system information about program availability. It also provides information on the new reorganization and their right to choose educational options for their child. Brochures also available in these languages explain the three program models: Transitional Bilingual Education Programs, English as a New Language Programs, and Dual Language Programs. Additionally, parents are provided with an explanation of the Common Core Learning standards, the core curriculum, assessments, student expectations and general educational program requirements all in their native language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Question 3 on page 6 for the AMAO Tool, we could not input information from ATS for the RLAT portion of the spreadsheet because the spreadsheet was a "Read-only" file. 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ann Gordon-chang, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Judge Charles J. Vallone School DBN: 30Q085 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ann Gordon Chang Title Principal Maria Samolis Assistant Principal Margerita Kalis Parent Coordinator Demetra Vasilopoulos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Janet Gordillo Parent Elizabeth Vlassopoulos Teacher/Subject Area Tina Papamichael Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sonia Rosselli School Counselor Dr. Phillip Composto Lawrence Pendergast Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Daniela Piliero Other SETTS Peter Tsimis Other ENL Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 71 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Judge Charles J. Vallone School Superintendent: Dr. Composto DBN: 30Q085 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Samolis Assistant Principal No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents/guardians come to PS 85Q to register their child, they are required to complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine the languages spoken at home. Since the HLIS is available in different languages, parents can complete it in their preferred language. When completing this form, a parent may indicate the language of communication they would prefer, both orally and through written correspondence. This information is input into the RCPL page in ATS. An oral interview is administered by ENL trained certified pedagogues. If translation services are required in another language that is not available in our school, we contact the DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit to translate by means of a telephone conference call. In order to ensure effective communication with our parents, we engage in the following activities: Parent Handbook on website translated in major school languages, our school website is updated with curricula news, school reports, and notices that are translated prior to sending them home. In addition, ELL parent orientation meetings as well as the initial PA meetings help assess translation and interpretation needs. The ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator help address these needs to the administration and school community. 2018-19 CEP 72  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Eligibility for ENL Service letters (within first 10 school days); testing information letters (October) September and ongoing throughout the year (within first 10 days of attendance) DOE Website provides translated template in different languages Continuation of ENL Service letters (within first 10 days of school) September and ongoing throughout the year (within first 10 days of attendance) DOE Website provides translated template in different languages Discontinuation of ENL Service letters (within first 10 days of school) September and ongoing throughout the year (within first 10 days of attendance) DOE Website provides translated template in different languages Welcome Letter (first week of school) September DOE provides translated template in different languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In house out of classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides interpret Parent/Teacher Conferences September/ November/ March/ May 2018-19 CEP 73 DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit  Parent ENL Program Selection Orientation September (within first 10 school days), as needed with new students In house out of classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides interpret DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit Ongoing group meetings with parents of ELL students Ongoing one-on-one meetings with parents of ELLs Throughout school year as needed ENL Teachers Throughout school year as needed ENL Teachers 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School emergency cards are used and in house teachers, paraprofessionals, or school aides translate. Also, if additional languages are needed, school staff will assist, otherwise school translation unit is utilized. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In the beginning of the school year, Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is reviewed with the staff along with resources available to support the school community. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated versions for parent/guardian brochures, promotion letters and other pertinent regulations will be downloaded from the DOE website and distributed to parents accordingly. In addition, all pertinent information will be sent in to the translation unit to be translated prior to it being disseminated. Finally, parents/guardians will receive notification of school events ten days prior to the scheduled event. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 74  The following mechanisms are used to gather parent feedback: Parent Surveys Parent Meetings and Workshops 2018-19 CEP 75 
