2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q087 School Name: P.S. 087 MIDDLE VILLAGE Principal: CARYN MICHAELI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 87Q 342400010087 PreK - 8 School Number (DBN): 24Q087 67-54 80 th St Middle Village, NY 11379 718-326-8243 718-894-3797 Phone Number: Fax: Caryn Michaeli cmichae@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Caryn Michaeli Colleen Zarinsky MatiGonzalez MarlainaFalanga N/A N/A N/A District Information Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Ave. Queens, NY 11368 MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: FSC: 24 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Robert Miller Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North RMiller2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8575 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Caryn Michaeli Colleen Zarinsky Mati Gonzalez Marie Elias CarissaCancemi MarlainaFalanga *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Heather Feller Maria Ramos ChristySanFillipo Suzette Poladian Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: ● It is our mission to educate our children not only academically but through a core foundation of knowledge that includes the arts, technology and the ability to accept individual differences as assets rather than hindrances. It is our 2018-19 CEP 9  hope that our students will recognize social injustices, speak out against inequities, and value humanity so when they takeover society, they are caring, empathetic people that will advocate for the goodness of all mankind. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. ● PS/IS 87 is a unique school in that it is a Pre-K to 8 school and most of the students remain at the school for 10 years. As a result, the school is family based and all stake holders, parents, students, and staff share the common goal of growing the children together. The entire school community has 24 hour access to the principal since her private cell phone number is given out.● ● The school’s emphasis is on the social emotional development of all students. Village News consists of a song followed by “Words Of Wisdom” that address real world issues. The philosophy of the school is ‘Treat People the Way You Want to Be Treated’ ● The school shares monthly celebrations with the parents such as Lunar New Year, Eid -Al-Fitr, Chanukah, Harvest Festival, Thanksgiving Festival, and other celebrations along with parent time on Tuesdays. ● The school has a Round Table which consists of upper grade students who are the decision makers in this school. ● In order to prepare students for career and college readiness our school is focusing on finding relevant information, chunking, highlighting and writing in the margins. The school has many collaborations such as: ● GRYC/SONIC (Greater Ridgewood Youth Council) – After school Program K-8 ● CHAMPS – Middle School Sports Program ● Middle Village Senior Center- Community Service ● The Middle Village Property Owners and Residents Association honored the principal for her recognition, dedication and service to the Middle Village Community. Oyster Project Con Edison Project WE Schools Snappet Math City Harvest Puerto Rico Iglesia Evangelica Bautista Church Food Pantry 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ● The school is made up of 12% ELLs which totals 53 students. We have 21% with special needs. Diagnosis range from Speech and Language delays, Autism and other health impaired. We have self contained classes and ICT classes for every grade. We 51% Hispanic, .48% American Indian, 36.03% Caucasian, 4.54% Asian, .16% Pacific Islander 1.29% Multi-Racial and 1.94% Black. The schools biggest challenge has been large class size and mass student refusals to take the N.Y.S exams. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made the most progress with Rigorous Instruction. Our key area of focus for this year will be the area of Mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q087 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 606 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 84 84 26 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 6 18 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 56.8% % Reduced Lunch 8.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 52.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 40.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.57 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 85 85 18 90.9% 6.4% 22.4% 2.1% 3.3% 1.8% 4 22% 7.6 41.1% 59% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Quality Review from 2015-16 indicates: School leaders and staff have very strong partnerships with families There are a common set of beliefs of how students learn best. Curriculum and data is used and refined to meet the students needs There is distributive leadership so teachers share in school wide policies The NYSED school report card indicates that the school went up in ELA and Math for the 2017-2018 school year but still needs to increase Math and Literacy scores. The NYC Quality Guide indicates: The Framework for Great Schools shows that 87 is lower than the city and the district in Rigorous Instruction. PS/IS 87 is significantly higher than the district in the areas of collaborative teachers ,trust, family community ties and effective school leadership. Strengths The schools strengths lie in:  Teachers and administrators have an in depth knowledge of academic and social emotional needs of the students.  Continuity of curriculum  CLS aligned   Emphasis on learning styles in order to maximize learning  Instructional focus is geared to college and career readiness Strong family and community ties 2018-19 CEP 13   Collaboration among staff members  High level of trust  Effective school leadership The schools goal is to continue to design lessons that are rigorous for all students . Focus on vocabulary and grammar in ELA Regents classes in Living Environment and Math starting in Grade 7 Focus on mathematics as a problem of practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students in Grades K-8 will show an increase in mathematics as measured by local assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Mathematics Periodic Assessments Students in Grades 10/2018 – 6/2019 Classroom Teachers  Mathematics Unit Tests ● Mathematics Parent Workshops ● Mathematics CLS aligned Portfolios 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3-8 Students in Grades 10/2018-6/2019 Classroom teachers K-8 Parents of K-8 students 10/2018-6/2019 Students in Grades K-8 10/2018-6/2019 Parent Coordinator Classroom teachers Classroom teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will use DoJo, emails, and hold Parent Workshops on Tuesday afternoons. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources   Per Session Instructional Resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 15  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 35% of students in K-8 will show an increase in Mathematics as measured by Local Assessments. Progress towards the goal: is 80% of students in K-8 will show an increase in Mathematics as measured by Local Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher created in house CLS assigned assessments K-2 Scantron in Grades 3-8 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Quality Review from 2015-16 indicates: School leaders and staff have very strong partnerships with families There are a common set of beliefs of how students learn best. Curriculum and data is used and refined to meet the students needs There is distributive leadership so teachers share in school wide policies The NYSED school report card indicates that the school went up in ELA and Math for the 2017-2018 school year but still needs to increase Math and Literacy scores. The NYC Quality Guide indicates: The Framework for Great Schools shows that 87 is lower than the city and the district in Rigorous Instruction. PS/IS 87 is significantly higher than the district in the areas of collaborative teachers ,trust, family community ties and effective school leadership. Strengths The schools strengths lie in:  Teachers and administrators have an in depth knowledge of academic and social emotional needs of the students. Instructional focus is geared to college and career readiness  Continuity of curriculum  CLS aligned   Emphasis on learning styles in order to maximize learning   Collaboration among staff members  High level of trust Strong family and community ties 2018-19 CEP 17   Effective school leadership The schools goal is to continue to design lessons that are rigorous for all students . Focus on vocabulary and grammar in ELA Regents classes in Living Environment and Math starting in Grade 7 Focus on mathematics as a problem of practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students and their families will participate in school wide activities resulting in more positive environment as measured by student surveys. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly celebrations recognizing different cultures Monthly evening parent/student empowerment activities Clubs Advisory 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PK-8 students and their families 10/2018 – 6/2019 Classroom teacher Guidance Counselor Administration PK-8 students and their families 10/2018-06/2019 School Psychologist Guidance counselor Social Worker K-8 students 9/2018 – Teachers 6/2019 6-8 students 9/2018-6/2019 Coaches Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Evening activities Daytime activities for parents Enrichment activities for students 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources Schedule Adjustments Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 25% increase of students and their families participating in school wide activities resulting in more positive environment as measured by student surveys. Progress towards goal: 68% increase of students and their families participating in school wide activities Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Quality Review from 2015-16 indicates: School leaders and staff have very strong partnerships with families There are a common set of beliefs of how students learn best. Curriculum and data is used and refined to meet the students needs There is distributive leadership so teachers share in school wide policies The NYSED school report card indicates that the school went up in ELA and Math for the 2017-2018 school year but still needs to increase Math and Literacy scores. The NYC Quality Guide indicates: The Framework for Great Schools shows that 87 is lower than the city and the district in Rigorous Instruction. PS/IS 87 is significantly higher than the district in the areas of collaborative teachers ,trust, family community ties and effective school leadership. Strengths The schools strengths lie in:  Teachers and administrators have an in depth knowledge of academic and social emotional needs of the students. Instructional focus is geared to college and career readiness  Continuity of curriculum  CLS aligned   Emphasis on learning styles in order to maximize learning   Collaboration among staff members  High level of trust Strong family and community ties 2018-19 CEP 21   Effective school leadership The schools goal is to continue to design lessons that are rigorous for all students . Focus on vocabulary and grammar in ELA Regents classes in Living Environment and Math starting in Grade 7 Focus on mathematics as a problem of practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration and coaches will provide ongoing targeted professional development which will help increase teaching and learning as evidenced by observations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Demo lessons  New Teacher Workshop Mathematics PD  Inter-visitations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Select teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers/Coaches All new teachers 10/2018- 6/2019 Teachers/Administration All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers/Coaches Administration All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers/Coaches Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement Monthly Mathematics Workshops Class Dojo Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources Instructional resources Schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of the teachers will have participated in targeted professional development as measured by sign in sheets and logs. Progress towards goal: 68% of the teachers will have participated in targeted professional development as measured by sign in sheets and logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations Support Logs Feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Quality Review from 2015-16 indicates: School leaders and staff have very strong partnerships with families There are a common set of beliefs of how students learn best. Curriculum and data is used and refined to meet the students needs There is distributive leadership so teachers share in school wide policies The NYSED school report card indicates that the school went up in ELA and Math for the 2017-2018 school year but still needs to increase Math and Literacy scores. The NYC Quality Guide indicates: The Framework for Great Schools shows that 87 is lower than the city and the district in Rigorous Instruction. PS/IS 87 is significantly higher than the district in the areas of collaborative teachers ,trust, family community ties and effective school leadership. Strengths The schools strengths lie in:  Teachers and administrators have an in depth knowledge of academic and social emotional needs of the students. Instructional focus is geared to college and career readiness  Continuity of curriculum  CLS aligned   Emphasis on learning styles in order to maximize learning   Collaboration among staff members  High level of trust Strong family and community ties 2018-19 CEP 25   Effective school leadership The schools goal is to continue to design lessons that are rigorous for all students . Focus on vocabulary and grammar in ELA Regents classes in Living Environment and Math starting in Grade 7 Focus on mathematics as a problem of practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a problem of practice in mathematics will have been identified resulting in an increase in mathematics as measured by local assessments. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher Team Meetings ● Student Work Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Pedagogues 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and students 10/2018– 6/2019 Administration Teachers Administrators Teachers ● Standards Based Portfolios Pedagogues 10/2018-Administrators 6/2019 Teachers ● Professional Development Pedagogues 10/2018-Administrators 6/2019 Teachers Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Math Workshops Tuesday Parent Engagement Class Dojo Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources Instructional resources Schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019, 30% of students will show an increase in mathematics as measured by Scantron and in house assessments. Progress towards goal: 80% students will show an increase in mathematics as measured by Scantron and in house assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess progress we will use portfolios, rubrics, Scantron and benchmarks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Parents tend to turn out for parties, celebrations and non academic events. ● Parents and students use the open access and open door policy. ● Parents’ text and call staff members on their private cell phones. ● Students trust working members of the school. ● Workshops offered ● Email blasts Priority Needs: ● Parents need to become more involved in the Parents Association and volunteer for events. ● Parents need to trust parents. ● Parents need to question their child/children about what is going on in the school. ● Students need to bring notices home to their parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in family and community ties as measured by parental participation in school events. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Class Dojo Monthly calendar Contact from Guidance Counselor Letters 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Prek- 8 9/2018 – 6/2019 Parent Coordinator PreK - 8 parents 9/2018- 6/2109 Teachers Principal Parent Coordinator PreK-8 students 9/2018 – 6/2019 Parents Prek- 8 10/2018-6/2019 Guidance Counselor Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Office of Mental Health Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources Instructional resources Schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019, there will be a 2% increase as measured by attendance sheets . Progress towards goal: 15% increase as measured by attendance sheets Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction Small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day During school day Small group instruction During school day Small group instruction During school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 ELA GE students as per Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundationsin K-2 ReadingPlus Fountas& Pinnelldata Mathematics Level 1 Math GE students as per In-house Assessments Science Level 1 Science GE students In-house Assessments Social Studies In class Social Studies Benchmark SnappitMath (Grade2) ComputerBased Program Chunking Highlighting Re-teach Literacyskills Paraphrasere-teach Trauma or tragedy or delusions At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Synthesizere-teach Individualized counseling/expressing feeling through drawing and writing One to one, small group During school day 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Not Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Title I school however we provide those students with basic school supplies such as backpacks, notebooks, folders, pencils and pens. Counseling services are provided by the Guidance Counselor. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  WE ARE NOT TITLE I SCHOOL 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $200.00 per student 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not a Title 1 school 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not a Title 1 school Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not a Targeted Assistance school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not a Targeted Assistance school 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not a SWP School 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not a SWP school 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 36  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 87Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 87Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 87Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 40  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 41  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The school presently has an enrollment of 54 ELLs out of a total population of 564 students in the building. 5.5% Spanish 1.42% Polish 1.24% Arabic .35% Chinese 1.06% Other In addition, our ELL population is comprised of 10 special education students out of our 54 ELL students. PS/IS 87Q recognizes the needs of its English Language Learners. We have a Language Acquisition Policy and a supportive staff who are dedicated to delivery and instruction with academic rigor. The curriculum utilized in ELL classes is aligned with the NYS standards in ENL. All ELLs are serviced by a licensed teacher. We service our students through a push-in and pull-out combination model. As per CR-Part 154, all students are receiving the minimum number of minutes of ENL weekly instruction. The ENL Academic Afterschool Program has changed the way we are presenting it to our students. We have enrolled an increased amount of students in Grades 3-5 and Grades 6-8 who are at the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level when assessed with the NYSISTELL Our team decided that it would be beneficial to target those students. Parent letters (in their home language) are sent home to inform the parents of the ENL students the day and time in which the program will be given. One licensed ENL teacher and 1 content area teacher will provide instruction for the Title III Program. The program runs each Wednesday for 33 weeks. There are two groups, Grades 3-5 and Grades 6-8 will meet on Wednesday 2:25pm - 4:25pm. No more than 10 students per group. Within the class the students are broken up into small groups based on their NYSESLAT scores according to their abilities. ENL teacher will break students into smaller groups such as speaking and listening being one group and reading and writing another group and then the groups will swap. Within those groups the ENL teacher and content area teacher will focus on the following skills with the Entering Level students: Listening: The ENL teacher utilizes basic English vocabulary with flash cards, pictures, gestures as well as preparing the students for the NYSESLAT. Students will listen to a brief conversation and find the corresponding pictures, listen to conversations and answer questions, describe a sequence of events or actions or a chronology of ideas, connect ideas and the cause and effect relationship. Students will develop a story with claim, reason and evidence. Students will make a connection between ideas and develop a problem and solution relationship, argument and develop a theme. Speaking: Students will contribute to a conversation, ask questions about relevant information, use language to reflect and paraphrase, describe characters, settings and situations, convey relevant details, retell a story in sequence, interpret facts and evidence. Poems and songs are 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information incorporated into the program. Teacher will incorporate poems, chanting, songs and interactive writing. Reading: Students will identify characters, setting, point of view, main idea, sequence events, connect ideas, compare and contrast information, context clues, textual information to find meaning and language imagery in leveled texts. The teacher also emphasizes vocabulary, reading fluency and writing skills through choral reading, rhymes, shared reading and chants. Writing: Students will produce writing pieces with a clear introduction, sequential events, concluding words and phrases,including relevant details and evidence. Students will develop a narrative with transitions between sequential events and opinion with a claim. Reflections are built into each writing piece. Teacher will keep Small Group Data based on pre and post tests. The computer program entitled Reading Plus will focus on building fluency and eye tracking of print as well as building comprehension. We evaluate the success of our ELL program by the results of the NYSESLAT by taking into consideration how many students have tested out of the program as well those who have shown growth in all areas. We also look at the progress the child is making in class by looking at their ELA/Math portfolios on a monthly basis and take notice of their progress and what skills still need to be mastered. We also look at the Fountas and Pinnell results. Informal assessments are used and the data is reviewed on a weekly basis during the Monday Professional development and the Tuesday afternoon teacher meetings which include all classroom teachers, ENL teacher and out of classroom teachers. The program was posted in order to obtain one highly qualified ENL teacher and a content area teacher to teach the after school program. The program is 2 hours a week and runs for 33 weeks from November to June. The following supplies will be purchased with Title III funds to enhance the After School Program to be used solely for the Title III program for the duration of the program: Books on tape - fiction and non fiction texts by Scholastic Book bins Leveled Books - titles will include fiction and non fiction books on all reading levels from Scholastic, Introduction to English books Supplies: paper, markers, pens, pencils, post its, folders, highlighters, and notebooks. Computer software/hardware -Rosettta Stone Program- the teacher of the program will participate in professional development to further incorporate technology into the program. We are continuing with the purchase of the computer program entitled Rosetta Stone to engage and move our ELL students in Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening during the after school program. The program is self-paced, personalized e-Learning with everyday content and reinforces grammar and increases vocabulary. This program enables students with limited or no exposure to a language to develop everyday conversational skills. ELL students in the after school program have access to lap tops in which they are afforded the opportunity to work on Starfall for our Entering ELL students to increase letter sound recognition and sight vocabulary. According to the NYSESLAT data those students who participated in the Title III Program moved up to Emerging and Transitioning levels. Home language support is through glossaries and on site libraries. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school runs in house professional development by the staff and training sessions for new teachers of ELLs in the classroom. New teachers receive the instruction and support they need to better provide their ELL students with the skills they need to thrive in the classroom. 15% of total hours for Professional development hours for all teachers including the ENL teacher (50% of total hours) is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners during the Monday PD sessions which are conducted by the Principal, Assistant Principals, Coach, IEP teacher and some of the ICT teachers. Agendas and attendance are kept in a binder for easy access. Our staff continues to collaborate with the ENL teacher regarding the specialized instruction that will support our ELLs in their learning as they progress from the elementary to middle school years. Assistant Principals, Common Branch teachers, Paraprofessionals, Special Education teachers, Guidance Counselors, OT, PT, and Speech Therapists participate in common planning time and professional development which is delivered by the coaches, lead teachers and mentors every Monday from 2:20pm - 3:40pm. Some of the topics will focus on Language Development, vocabulary development, math strategies, differentiated instructions, scaffolding instruction, CLS and lesson planning, questioning techniques, Math strategies: From concrete to abstract, Guiding questions, and Formative Assessments. This encompasses all the academic curriculum for all students including general education, special education and ELLs which will effectively instruct students in the Title III program. The ENL teacher and teacher's of ELL students are invited to attend several different types of professional development seminars. They participate in DOE workshops run by the Office of English Language Learners as per their email offerings. Ongoing workshop that a (1) teacher of ENL students attends is 'Institute for Teachers of ELLs. The ENL teacher attends several PDs throughout the year. The teacher will receive PD directly from the vendor. The schedule and number of session will be determined as the year progresses. We evaluate the success of our ELL program by the results of the NYSESLAT by taking into consideration how many students have tested out of the program as well those who have shown growth in all areas. We also look at the progress the child is making in class by looking at their ELA/Math portfolios on a monthly basis and take notice of their progress and what skills that still need to be mastered. In addition, Fountas and Pinnell data is reviewed with both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher. PD binders are stored in room 115. Informal assessments are used and the data is reviewed on a weekly basis during the Monday Professional development and the Tuesday afternoon teacher meetings which include all classroom teachers, ENL teacher and out of classroom teachers. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency and parents of migratory children inclusive of providing information and report in an understandable and uniform format including alternative languages (translated) in a language the parents understand. Translation and Interpretation funds are used when needed. We have in place programs, activities and procedures for parent involvement including gender initiatives nights, family math night, family arts night, school trips, International Day, cultural awareness through school wide celebrations Eid, Lunar New Year, Purim and Harvest Parade which include all parents as well as the ELL parents. Translation services are provided as needed. Workshops are offered to all parents during the year including parents of ELL students. Many of these workshops are in partnership with other agencies and CBO’s. All of our workshops are offered and planned based on parent needs through parent surveys. Workshops promote their full partnership in their child’s education, decision making and advisory committees to assist in the education of their children. Translation services are provided as needed. Parents needs are evaluated through face to face parent meetings, inquiries to parents via our distribution network which is emails and parent mailings. Specific forms include DOE annual survey, school surveys, PA meetings, parent questionnaires all of which are distributed through the Parent Coordinator. All documents that are sent home are translated into the parents home language. Translation services are set up by the Parent Coordinator as needed. 2017- 2018 SY All ELL parents are invited to the school wide functions and translation services are provided as needed. Some of the functions include: October 2017 Annual Harvest Day Celebration school wide November 2017 High School Fair with past students 7-8pm January 2018 Parent support for NYSESLAT March 2018 Math Workshop May 2018 Scholastic Book Fair 2018- 2019 SY All ELL parents are invited to the school wide functions and translation services are provided as needed. Dates Parents are informed about parental activities in their preferred language by in house translators, funds from the Interpretation and Translation Services and translated letters are sent home. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the LAC will contact the translation and interpretation unit when needed. In addition, staff members are utilized to contact homes when the language of the child is the same as the staff member. All agendas and records will be housed in the Parent Coordinator's office. An internet based program entitled DoJo is utilized throughout the school to inform parents of ELLs of their child's success and their progress in all academic areas. This application creates a positive classroom culture. Sharing photos and videos of classroom moments help parents to be engaged in their child's education. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $ 7290.36 will be used for direct instruction  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1235.00 $1840.64 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2000.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After School Title III Program Total 2 teachers 2 teachers x 2hrs x 33 weeks x $55.23=$7290.36 Professional Development delivered by Rosetta Stone Books on tape from Scholastic Book Bins Leveled books both fiction and non fiction from Scholastic Computer Program Supplies: paper, markers, pens, pencils, post its, folders, highlighters, notebooks, 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Rosetta Stone Computer Programs: purchase of 12 licenses Travel Other TOTAL $ 12366. 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name The Middle Village School Borough Queens School Number 087 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Caryn Michaeli Coach Lucille Engel ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher D. Merkel & N. Skotak Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area Claudia Katz Related-Service Provider Jane Shataka Superintendent Madeline Chan Assistant Principal Melissa Guarino Coach Lauren Fradella School Counselor Fran Vella Parent Kim Stulic Parent Coordinator Kirstin Pollina Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 609 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to annually evaluate ELLs with Fountas and Pinnell the first running record is administered. Reading levels are then shared with the ENL teacher. Skills lessons are provided on a daily basis in the classroom and the ELL students are afforded the same opportunities to participate in skills lessons and small group strategy lessons as well as guided reading lessons. The ENL teacher has daily correspondence with the classroom teachers regarding any struggles the student is having. Teachers review student performance data on a regular basis and incorporate literacy skills to meet the diverse needs of the students. This data helps to inform our school's instructional plan by providing strengths and weaknesses for ELL students to the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The data reveals that our self contained ELL students are significantly delayed which is the reason they were placed in small classes because it is a learning disability not a language issue. The ELL students who are in the general education classes are significantly higher only functioning 1 or 2 years below their grade level. Data also revealed that our ELL students have 2018-19 CEP 53  difficulty in the speaking and writing portion of the NYSESLAT so an ELL focus throughout grades K-8 was to work on speaking and writing using pictures as a prompt to facilitate discussion and writing skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Faculty meetings, one to one conferences and common preps are the structures that we have in place to support this effort. In addition, Tuesday afternoons are also used to disseminate information to the parents of ELL students along with their classroom teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? -We evaluate the success of our ELL program by the results of the NYSESLAT by taking into consideration how many students have tested out of the program as well those who have moved into the Expanding and Commanding range or those that might have special needs and need to be placed in a special ed classroom. We also look at the progress the child is making in class by looking at their ELA/Math portfolios on a monthly basis and take notice of their progress and what skills that still need to be mastered and we look at teacher effectiveness. We administer the Fountas and Pinnell Reading assessments to all students in K-8 in the beginning of the year as to get a baseline on their reading level. Students in K-2 will take the NYC Performance Task in Math and the students in grades 3-8 will take the Math Scantron to get a baseline in Math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Faculty meetings, one to one conferences and common preps are the structures that we have in place to support this effort. In addition, Tuesday afternoons are also used to disseminate information to the parents of ELL students along with their classroom teachers. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] -Tier 1 instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs at PS/IS 87Q is differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level within the classroom. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support occurs in the classroom, but also in separate settings with the ENL teacher with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction is also be tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs and is based on the student's NYSESLAT modalities. Progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL’s progress takes into account language development and background. The student’s progress is then compared with levels demonstrated by peers from comparable cultural, linguistic, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or comparable intervention. Tier 2 intervention is provided in addition to regular classroom instruction. The students are taught in a small group, receiving additional instructional time and/or taught using various techniques and with more intensive focus on hard concepts. Tier 3 intervention is also provided in addition to regular classroom instruction. The students receives more frequent and intensive support than in Tiers 1 or 2, sometimes on an individual basis. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. -The data patterns that are revealed by the NYSISTELL is that those students who tend not to be proficient are Grades 3-7 students this year. The grade 4, 3 students fall into the Entering level, level out of nine. The data reveals that 17 of our ELLs were at the Expanding level in the 16-17 SY which now has increase to 23 ELLs in the 17-18SY and 17 ELLs were at 2018-19 CEP 54  Transitioning level in the 16-17 SY which has increased to 23 ELLs. The data pattern that is revealed by NYSESLAT is that in grade 3, 5 and 6 the students achieved a proficient level in the listening and speaking portion. Grades 1, 4, 7 and 8 achieved an advanced level of proficiency in the listening and speaking portion. In the reading and writing portion the data reveals that the students in all grades fall between the intermediate and advanced levels. The data also reveals that 16 of our ELL population are Special Education students and 8 of our ELL students are speech and language impaired. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Faculty meetings, one to one conferences and common preps are the structures that we have in place to support this effort. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Stand alone and Push In model of our ENL program minutes are implemented according to CR Part 154.2. Students are grouped according to their grade level such a as K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8. This is the first year that we have two ENL teachers. The program is comprised of one ENL teacher working with K- 4 students and the other ENL teacher's program is made up with 5-8 students. Students are grouped with mixed abilities/proficiency levels and within the groups small groups are created based on the needs of the child. In this respect, our students receive full ENL support along with their regular class and in that framework. Collaborative planning between the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers are built into their programs so that the ENL teachers are supporting the curriculum while incorporating the ENL standards/strategies. This ensures that tour ELL students are fully participating in all aspects of the PS/IS 87 programs. b. TBE program. If applicable. PS/IS 87Q does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. PS/IS 87Q does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have a Stand alone and Push In ENL program in which the minutes are implemented according to CR Part 154.2. Students are grouped according to their grade level such a as K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, In this respect, our students receive full ENL support along with their regular class and in that framework. Collaborative planning between the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers is built into their programs so that the ENL teachers are supporting the curriculum while incorporating the ENL standards/strategies. This ensures that our ELL students are fully participating in all aspects of the PS/IS 87 programs. 2018-19 CEP 55  Our program reflects the CR Part 154 requirements which are Entering 180 minutes standalone and 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA, Emerging 180 minutes standalone and 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA, Transitioning 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes standalone, Expanding 180 minutes ENL/ELA or other content area and Commanding 90 minutes ENL/ELA or other content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school offers its ELL population a variety of instructional approaches. Our school wide instruction model is I Do , We do, You Do. During ELA instruction, teachers create their own lessons utilizing authentic pieces of literature which are aligned to the Learning Standards where students receive small group instruction focusing on the skill at hand. This model is utilized throughout all academic subjects in all K-8 classrooms. Guided reading groups meet throughout the ELA block to ensure that each student is moving upwards in both level and comprehension. Envision math is used in the classroom with ELL students as well as the general education students. In the content area instruction, teachers conduct small group strategy lessons with the ELLs to ascertain their comprehension and ability to carry out prescribed tasks. When native language support is needed the ENL teachers collaboratively plan with the classroom teacher which is built into their programs so that the ENL teachers are supporting the curriculum while incorporating the ENL standards/strategies. This ensures that our ELL students are fully participating in all aspects of the PS/IS 87 programs. We do not currently have a DL or TBE program at our school. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are afforded the opportunity to take the NYS Math and NYS Science test in their native languages. Working closely with the ENL teacher the AP orders the tests needed in native languages in the beginning of the year. In addition any child that speaks a language that there is not a translated version of the the test the Parent Coordinator arranges for a translator to come to the school to administer the test. Tests that are administered throughout the year are translated into the child's native language if he/she is more comfortable with their native language. Paraprofessionals are utilized to complete this task. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently have no SIFE students in our program. In order to meet their needs, ENL instruction will revolve around leveled reading with language and grammar slightly above the student’s reading level. Content area materials are used to aide in comprehension while teaching academically appropriate content. Skills and strategies are embedded in each lesson so that ELL students do not miss these important learning components. SIFE students receive extended instructional time, which would be offered through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. b. Newcomers in the school for less than three years are paired with advanced students in the class and group work. Dialogues and role play are implemented to build conversation and listening/speaking skills. These students remain in their classroom for the state mandated hours of ENL instruction. Audio materials as well as picture dictionaries help to bridge 2018-19 CEP 56  the language gap and speed up comprehension. In order to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year the ELLs are recommended for summer school sites to offer assistance in the acquiring the English language. c. ELLs that are in our ENL program for 4 to 6 years, follow the transition from intermediate to advanced proficiency. The data reveals that 21 ELLs are classified as speech and language impaired. They receive special ed services and are in smaller classrooms. Due to their limited capacity in both their native language and English they receive ENL services however their progress is slower due to their disabilities. Their services are lessened to 4 times a week and they remain in their class while an ENL teacher pushes in to their class. Scaffolds employed at this level include: genre texts with simplified English, charts and pictures with vocabulary words clearly defined and used in their correct contexts. Grammar and writing materials are supplemented and Bilingual dictionaries utilized both in the classrooms as well as during ENL class. This ensures that there is continuity across the classes. d. Long term ELLs receive reading and comprehension skills to raise their reading and writing abilities. The focus is on improving grammar, spelling, syntax and reading comprehension. Paraphrasing, reading comprehension and inference is built into their writing lessons. The Instructional Focus throughout the school is focusing on finding relevant information in text utilizing chunking strategies, highlighting or colored pencils to underline relevant information and writing in the margins. (Skimming, scanning topic sentences, reading for meaning, critiquing act...) e. Those students who have tested at Commanding level are provided the mandated 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. At PS/IS 87Q we also pay special attention to the needs of those students who pass the NYSESLAT. Differentiated instruction is provided according to age and grade level for the two years extension, as well as for special accommodation during testing.The Instructional Focus throughout the school is focusing on finding relevant information in text utilizing chunking strategies, highlighting or colored pencils to underline relevant information and writing in the margins. f. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status, as per CR Part 154.2 are afforded the opportunity to have testing modifications as well as the services of the ENL teachers in their content area classes.The Instructional Focus throughout the school is focusing on finding relevant information in text utilizing chunking strategies, highlighting or colored pencils to underline relevant information and writing in the margins. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? -ELLs that receive Special Education Services, we increase the application of visual support to help them have a better understanding of the writing process. Also to increase their comprehensible input and meaning experiences through scaffold reading strategies, and increase application of kinesthetic strategies that support vocabulary development, syllabication, phonics and spelling. IEPs of individual student is reviewed to make sure that all instructional recommended strategies are properly implemented during instruction. Students have access to lap tops in which they are afforded the opportunity to work on Starfall for our Beginner/Intermediate ELL students to increase letter sound recognition and sight vocabulary. The Beginner/Intermediate/Advanced ELL students utilize Scantron to ascertain a baseline and a grade level so that the classroom teacher and ENL teacher can accelerate English development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? -Special needs ELLs receive ENL services in small group or ICT class. Their IEP’s are closely reviewed to allow for accurate target instruction and planning that revolves around the students learning disability or particular area of difficulty. Visual aids and audio language tapes are employed as needed to aide in teaching the curriculum. Students, who reach NYSESLAT proficiency, continue to receive support from the ENL teachers as well as AIS support. Students have access to lap tops in which they are afforded the opportunity to work on Starfall for our Entering and Emerging ELL students to increase letter sound recognition and sight vocabulary. 2018-19 CEP 57  All ELL students utilize Scantron to ascertain a baseline and a grade level so that the classroom teacher and ENL teachers can accelerate English development. ELL students are placed in the Integrated Co Teaching classes in order to support their language development. With the support of two teachers the students are afforded many opportunities to acquire the English language in a 12:1 student teacher ratio. Those students who excel at a specific content area are then placed in the more advanced group so that they will continue to thrive. Grades 3-8 ELL-SWD students are mainstreamed into the Science curriculum where students are afforded the opportunity to do hands on science projects/labs as well as work with in small groups where IEP goals are addressed and students are able to support their language acquisition through discussion with their classmates. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers its ELL population a variety of targeted interventions. During ELA instruction, the ELL students in addition to the GE and SWD students receive small group instruction focusing on the skill at hand. Guided reading groups meet throughout the ELA block to ensurre that each student is moving upwards in both level and comprehension. Through the push in model the ENL teachers are able to support our Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding students In content area instruction that is Social Studies, Science and Math , teachers conduct small group strategy lessons and reteach lessons with the ELLs to ascertain their comprehension, content understanding and ability to carry out prescribed tasks. Teachers target academically rigorous and challenging instructional goals, while providing students with the instructional supports they need to achieve success. Teachers build on students’ abilities and exchange ideas through dialogue, questioning, and sharing ideas in small groups. We provide AIS in Math and ELA for students who have not scored in the proficient range. Interventions are provided in English only. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One program that we want to continue working with is the Rosetta Stone. Computer software/hardware -Rosettta Stone Program- the teacher of the program will participate in professional development to further incorporate technology into the program. The trends showed that those students who participated in the after school program demonstrated growth by moving one to two level along the continuum We purchased the computer program entitled Rosetta Stone to engage and move our ELL students in Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening during the after school program. The program is self-paced, personalized e-Learning with everyday content and reinforces grammar and increases vocabulary. This program enables students with limited or no exposure to a language to develop everyday conversational skills. ELL students in the after school program have access to lap tops in which they are afforded the opportunity to work on Starfall for our Entering ELL students to increase letter sound recognition and sight vocabulary. In addition this year, our Grade 8 ELL, SWD and GE students participate in a program entitled Duo Lingo. Classes meet four a week. This is a self paced interactive language program. Each lesson includes a variety of speaking, listening, translation and multiple choice challenges. The students have the choice of Spanish, Italian, German or French. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 58  - No programs or services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In addition this year, our Grade 8 ELL, SWD and GE students participate in a program entitled Duo Lingo. Classes meet four a week. This is a self paced interactive language program. Each lesson includes a variety of speaking, listening, translation and multiple choice challenges. ELLs participate in Dance, Technology and Art. All the required services support and resources correspond to the ELLs ages and grade levels. ELL students receive speech, OT, PT, special education services and guidance according to their IEPs. The ENL Academic Afterschool Program has changed the way we are presenting it to our students. We have enrolled an increased amount of students in Grade 4, Grade 5, Grade 6 and Grade 7. who are at the Entering level when assessed with the NYSISTELL Our team decided that it would be beneficial to target those students. Parent letters (in their home language) are sent home to inform the parents of the ENL students the day and time in which the program will be given. One licensed ENL teacher and 1 content area teacher will provide instruction for the Title III Program. The program runs each Wednesday for 35 weeks. There are two groups, Grades 4-5 and Grades 6-7 will meet on Wednesday 2:25pm - 4:25pm. No more than 10 students per group. Within the class the students are broken up into small groups based on their NYSESLAT scores according to their abilities. ENL teacher will break students into smaller groups such as speaking and listening being one group and reading and writing another group and then the groups will swap. Within those groups the ENL teacher and content area teacher will focus on the following skills with the Entering Level students: The ENL teacher utilizes basic English vocabulary with flash cards, pictures, gestures as well as preparing the students for the NYSESLAT. Students will listen to a brief conversation and find the corresponding pictures, listen to conversations and answer questions, describe a sequence of events or actions or a chronology of ideas, connect ideas and the cause and effect relationship. Students will develop a story with claim, reason and evidence. Students will make a connection between ideas and develop a problem and solution relationship, argument and develop a theme. Students will contribute to a conversation, ask questions about relevant information, use language to reflect and paraphrase, describe characters, settings and situations, convey relevant details, retell a story in sequence, interpret facts and evidence. Poems and songs are incorporated into the program. Teacher will incorporate poems, chanting, songs and interactive writing. Teachers conduct strategy lessons to build comprehension. The teachers emphasize vocabulary, reading fluency and writing skills through choral reading, rhymes, shared reading and chants in all grades. Poems and songs are incorporated into the program. Guided Reading is utilized to achieve fluency throughout the grade levels. ELL students are afforded the opportunity to participate in the before school CHAMPS program where they are part of the entire school body and engaged in physical activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Grades 6-8 participate in computer class several times a week utilizing Powerpoint, Microsoft Word, Movie Maker. Students integrate the Social Studies and Science topics into projects. Also half of our school is equipped with SMART Boards that are utilized by the teachers for their interactive class lessons. Students have access to lap tops in which they are afforded the opportunity to work on Starfall for our Entering and Emerging ELL students to increase letter sound recognition and sight vocabulary. The Entering/Emerging/Transitioning/Expanding/Commanding ELL students utilize Scantron to ascertain a baseline and a grade level so that the classroom teacher and ENL teacher can accelerate English development. 2018-19 CEP 59  In addition, all ELL students are afforded the opportunity to work with www.esolhelp.com which encompasses ENL flashcards, ENL picture dictionary, vocabulary games, math games, science games, geography games and spelling games. The software helps to enrich the English language as well as reinforcing the concepts. The ENL teacher has native language books for students to utilize in the ENL classroom as well as lending those books to the classroom teachers to use in the room. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? -In our ESL program model, home language support is present but only in the very early stages of the student’s career. Typically, a kindergarten Polish speaking student might orally translate nouns and commands to himself from the English just until comprehension and scaffolding vocabulary can replace this. In grades K-2 the ELL teacher is using rhymes, chanting and choral readings to help support language. Older age students are encouraged to use bilingual glossaries in their classrooms as well as when preparing for the state exams. Content area instruction is based on the Social Studies State Standards and the Core Standards. The skills are embedded into the curriculum to support the ELA standards. In content area instruction, teachers try to include references from the students’ home country, customs, geography, politics etc. in order to tap into prior knowledge. All the required services support and resources correspond to the ELL's ages and grade levels. ELL students receive speech, OT, PT, special education services and guidance accordance to their IEPs.. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All the required services which are listed on on a child's IEP(recommended program and services section) such as OT, PT, Speech, special education and guidance support and resources correspond to the ELLs ages and grade levels. The groupings are leveled according to both grade levels as well as proficiency levels. Students who come in as an ELL student information ATS (BIOS) for those students who have been in the NYC Public School System and are placed accordingly. Those students who come to our school from outside the United States an interview is conducted with the parents by a trained pedagogue and the interview questions help the school identify the correct grade and age of the students. Classroom teachers use the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies/Science so that the materials presented are age appropriate and are aligned with the learning standards. Some of the topics will spiral through the grades building on the prerequisites. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New incoming ELL students participate in a one to one conference with the principal in which she acclimates the student to our school. She introduces him/her to other ELL students in the class as well as general education students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In addition this year, our Grade 8 ELL, SWD and GE students participate in a program entitled Duo Lingo. Classes meet four a week. This is a self paced interactive language program. Each lesson includes a variety of speaking, listening, translation and multiple choice challenges. The students have the choice of Spanish, Italian, German or French. 2018-19 CEP 60  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? DO NOT HAVE DUAL LANGUAGE PROGRAM Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school runs in house professional development by the and training sessions for new teachers of ELLs in the classroom. New teachers receive the instruction and support they need to better provide their ELL students with the skills they need to thrive in the classroom. Our professional development days are used to provide these teachers with the mandated hours (7.5 hours) they require for ENL training and 10 hours for the special education teachers. Our staff continues to collaborate with the ENL teacher regarding the specialized instruction that will support our ELLs in their learning as they progress from the elementary to middle school years. The school secretaries participate in workshops that are run by District 24 which focus on ATS reports that assist in making sure that students receive ENL services when they first register at the school. The Parent Coordinator is consistently working with parents to ensure that the parents' understand the memos that are sent home as well as the school calendars and school menus. The guidance counselor attends workshops that are offered by the District 24 including but not limited to crisis management and ACS interventions. The guidance counselor also works with the ELL students assisting them in the application process to transition into high school. She conducts individual parent appointments to go over the high school application process and when a translator is needed she utilizes the services of our paraprofessionals. She also works with the ELL students for middle school articulation. Assistant Principals, Common Branch teachers, Paraprofessionals, Special Education teachers, Guidance Counselors, OT, PT, and Speech Therapists participate in common planning time and professional development which is delivered by the coaches, lead teachers and mentors every Monday 2:20 - 3:40 and Tuesday 2:20-3:00 parent involvement and then from 3:00- 3:30 professional planning. This encompasses all the academic curriculum for all students including general education, special education and ELLs. The ENL teacher and teacher's of ELL students are invited to attend several different types of professional development seminars. They participate in the ENL workshops run by District 24 as per the Professional Development Calendar. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor also works with the ELL students assisting them in the application process to transition into high school. She conducts individual parent appointments to go over the high school application process and when a translator is needed she utilizes the services of our paraprofessionals. She also works with the ELL students for middle school articulation. Before an 8 th grade ELL transfers to high school the guidance counselor is in contact with the parent and child on several occasions. A translator is utilized if needed. This varies from workshops, telephone conferences, emails and individual 2018-19 CEP 61  appointments. During these events the high school process is discussed including visiting high schools, filling out the high school application, transportation, types of programs, school size and admission methods. When the ELL student is matched to their high school the guidance counselor advises the ELL student to practice the transportation method to be used and identifying different routes to and from school and home. The guidance counselor also sets up a meet the ENL teacher at the high school to make the transition easier. 15% of total hours for Professional development hours for all teachers including the ENL teacher (50% of total hours) is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners during the Monday PD sessions which are conducted by the Coach, IEP teacher and some of the ICT teachers. Agendas and attendance are kept in a binder for easy access. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have in place programs, activities and procedures for parent involvement including gender initiatives nights, family math night, family arts night, talent shows, school trips,concerts, and awards programs which include all parents as well as the ELL parents. We provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency and parents of migratory children inclusive of providing information and report in an understandable and uniform format including alternative languages (translated) in a language the parents understand. Language Translation Unit is utilized within the school when a language is spoken by a parent that we do not have a pedagogue or paraprofessional that speaks it. The Parent Coordinator makes the initial contact with the unit ensuring that a control number is ascertained and then the teacher or Assistant Principal makes contact with the translator. When a pedagogue/paraprofessional speaks the parent language then they are used to assist in the translation to the parent. The goals of the program and language development are discussed during the Tuesday afternoon parent involvement sessions. The two ELL teachers make appointments with the parents of ELL students. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Workshops are offered to all parents during the year including parents of ELL students. Some of these workshops are in partnership with other agencies andCBO’s while others include our Student Round table and Honor Society which several Former ELL students and ELL students participate in the planning and disseminating the workshop. Some include Parent Cookie Decorating, Winter Story time with a parent, and Jeopardy with your family. All of our workshops are offered and planned based on parent needs through parent surveys. Workshops promote their full partnership in their child’s education, decision making and advisory committees to assist in the education of their children. The parent coordinator is a liaison between the school and home. When needed she will call the translation unit to speak with parents in their native language. Most of our parents like us to speak English to them because they want to learn the language. Mandated ELL meetings are held which introduce parents to the ELL programs, the school’s goals and objectives, state standards, assessments ( NYSITELL and NYSESLAT), the core curriculum and essential ENL strategies. The ELL Coordinator/Parent Coordinator facilitates these meetings for newly enrolled ELL students and their parents. 2018-19 CEP 62  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Caryn Michaeli, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 087 School DBN: 24Q087 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Caryn Michaeli Title Principal Melissa Guarino Assistant Principal Kirstin Pollina Parent Coordinator Diane Merkel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kim Stulic Parent Nichole Skotak Teacher/Subject Area Lucille Engel Lauren Fradella Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Fran Vella School Counselor Madeline Chan James Leahy Claudia Katz Jane Shataka Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Speech Provider Other Speech Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/51/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/0517 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 10/05/17 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q087 School Name: Middle Village School Superintendent: M.Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Melissa Guarino Assistant Principal No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The parents requiring language assistance is determined within the required 30 day period from the date of enrollment. The ATS system is coded accordingly to reflect language assistance as well as the student emergency blue card. In addition, periodic surveys are conducted to determine if parents prefer notices in their native languages. In addition, ATS Report of Preferred Languages, Blue Card data, Parent Surveys and Teacher Surveys. Parents of ELL students are provided with notifications in both English and their native language. Oral interpretations are provided through school staff, parent volunteers and the translation unit. These translation services are arranged and provided through the Assistant Principal/Parent Coordinator. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 66  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese (any) Italian Mandarin Mossi English Polish Portuguese Romanian Slovak Spanish Turkish Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek 7 15 6 2 0 1 458 31 1 4 1 86 1 2 1 3 1.13 2.42 .97 .32 0 .16 73.99 5.01 .16 .65 .16 13.89 .16 .32 .16 .48 1 14 5 2 1 0 455 30 2 4 1 91 1 2 1 2 1.13 2.26 .81 .32 .16 0 73.51 4.85 .32 .65 .16 14.7 .16 .32 .16 .32 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent at least 10% of the population in our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Class designations emails August via email and letter Holiday Letters Ongoing via email back pack letters Parent Teacher Conference dates Via email and back pack letters Testing dates Via email and back pack letters Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November/March Tuesday afternoon Parent Meetings Throughout the year communication is distributed to families via DoJo app and telephone calls via interpreters. interpretation service(s)? In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. Letters utilized from the templates on the intranet. In house translators and translation and interpretation hot line if needed. Student led conferences assist the parents with understanding the language. These conferences instill responsibility in ELL students. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize in house translators to call/text parents via cell phone in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will conduct professional development session exclusively on translations and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 68  Parents are provided the Bill of Parent’s Rights and Responsibilities in their preferred language to include their rights for Translation & Interpretation Services. Notices are conspicuously posted at our main entrance in covered languages stating the availability of translations and interpretation services. In addition, the D.O.E. website is provided to all parents whose preferred language is other than English on how to access information in their language and how to access the Translation & Interpretation Unit of the D.O.E. We will conduct professional development session exclusively on translations and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 69 
