2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q092 School Name: P.S. 092 HARRY T. STEWART SR. Principal: PASQUALE BARATTA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Harry T. Stewart Sr. School 30Q092 343000010092 Pre-K to 5 School Number (DBN): 99-01 34 th Avenue, Corona, NY 11368 718-533-1013 718-533-1083 Phone Number: Fax: Anthony Loverso ALovers@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Pasquale Baratta Geraldine Clark SantoZecena Geraldine Clark MaribelAparicio NA Kelly Sloan District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 7183918320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pasquale Baratta Geraldine Clark Santos Zecena MaribelAparicio Blanca Sinchi Flavia Hernandez Rosa Mar Ben Ehrlich *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name LaQuishaHamilton Sophia Papa Wendy Rajeh NubeCaceres Jerry Romero Kelly Crockett YennyLavin FaustaTejada Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our vision at P.S. 92 is to provide a comprehensive education that enables our students to be responsible, contributing, members of society. "Our mission is to do our best every day.” Rigorous instruction, aligned to the Next Generation Standards, is differentiated and challenging for students of all grades. High standards are set in every classroom for students as they are developing critical thinking skills. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our supportive environment has helped our school establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe and supported. Parents are encouraged to partner in their children’s education. Strong family-community ties bring resources from within and beyond our community to the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships like the Queens Hall of Science, New York Cares and other community-based organizations. High expectations are part of our Mission Statement: “All students at P.S. 92 will participate in learning activities that challenge them to reach their highest potential. Teachers and staff will work with parents to support our children." The Harry T. Stewart Sr. School is a Queens, NY, elementary school with 987 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 4.6% Black, 92.5% Hispanic, 0.7% White, and 2% Asian students. The student body includes 56.3% English Language Learners and 13.0% special education students. Boys account for 49.8% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50.2%. The average attendance rate for the school year is 96%. The school receives Title 1 funding with 100% eligibility. Students requiring services receive the full continuum as indicated on their IEPs. They include occupational and physical therapy, speech services in English and Spanish, resource room in English and Spanish, and adaptive physical education. In addition, 482 of students are English Language Learners; the vast majority are Spanish language speakers. In the category of “recent immigrants”, 12 have immigrated to the U.S. within the last three years. The school consists of 69 pedagogues and support staff: one Principal, two Assistant Principals, one Parent Coordinator, one Literacy Coach, one Math Coach, one ENL Coordinator, one full-time Guidance Counselor, 21 paraprofessionals, three secretaries, one School Safety Officer and 9 school aides. PS 92 implements the Ready Gen literacy program and is guided by a literacy coach. This Next Generation Standards aligned program is supported by Month by Month Phonics and Fundations. Literacy support sessions are also provided by the Read Ahead program. The Go Math program is used in all grades supported by a Math coach. It provides a comprehensive, Next Generation Standards aligned, approach to learning Math. Technology is incorporated into instruction through the use of computer software throughout the school. Science programs follow the ISC Scope and Sequence for Science. The goal is to encourage students to question and investigate the natural world using the scientific method and through their participation in the annual Science Fair. Music teachers provide instruction in the areas of chorus, instrument lessons, and general music. Students perform at events throughout New York City. The culminating activity of the program is a musical extravaganza. Music and the Brain is a funded program providing keyboards and professional development. The Physical Education program fosters physical and mental development and advocates a healthy life style. Our students receive instruction in health education from a teacher who is trained in the New York City Health Curriculum. The art program allows students to use a variety of media and techniques to explore different themes and cultures. Students create beautiful artwork which is displayed throughout the school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One special student population within PS 92 is that of the Students with Special Needs. In order to meet the needs of this diverse community of learners, we have six self-contained classes: one (1) K/1 bridge class, one (1) grade 1/2 bridge class, one (1) third grade class, one (1) fourth grade class, and two (2) fifth grade classes. We also maintain one ICT class per grade from K through 5. We continue to seek out and hire highly qualified teachers of Students with Special Needs. Special Education support services thrive at PS 92. Services available include support by speech and language therapists, a counselor, an occupational therapist, a physical therapist, hearing and vision service providers, an adaptive physical education teacher, and special education teachers. 2018-19 CEP 10  Another special student population within PS 92 is that of the English Language Learners (ENLs). This is the predominant population within our school community. Within this community there are many varied and specific needs to be addressed. In order to meet these needs we have expanded our Bi-Lingual program and therefore service more Bi-Lingual students than ever before. We continue to seek out and hire highly qualified teachers of Bi-lingual students. Another way we meet the specific needs of our (ENLs) is to seek out and hire highly qualified ENL teachers. We encourage teachers to become ENL certified. The goal of the ENL program is to teach all English as a New Language Learners (ENLs) to listen, speak, read and write in English per English Language Learners Standards. The Bilingual program provides students with self-contained Bilingual instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element from the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year is with our teacher collaboration. In accordance with the Framework for Great Schools and the new teacher schedule, teachers and other staff members throughout the school community began working more collaboratively than in any recent school year. As this was the first full year with new curriculum and all materials in place and on hand, teachers were able to provide one another with many valuable insights as to best implement these practices for our students. This school year continues monthly professional development committee meetings. Our key area of focus from the Framework for Great Schools for this school year is Supportive Environment. Our teachers are committed to our students' success and improvement, focusing on English Language Arts. Our staff is committed to the success and achievement of all of our students. Our staff is constantly reflecting on various forms of data and what can be done to accelerate student achievement. Our cabinet will plan professional development, focusing on the inquiry process, and common teacher planning that will improve instruction. In order to achieve effective school leadership, the Principal leads by example, instilling trust, and nurturing the professional growth of teachers and staff. Building leadership capacity within our many talented staff members will be a cornerstone for future success and improving teaching in order to accelerate student progress. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q092 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 928 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 75 74 35 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 10 36 35 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 79.5% % Reduced Lunch 27.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 97.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.09 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 79 80 36 95.6% 0.3% 19.6% 1.1% 1.2% 0.4% 4 3% 7.4 33.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The New York State School Report indicated that PS 92 should focus on meeting AYP for Math. This was also reviewed during Principal Performance Observation from the 2017-2018 school year. The Math results of the School Quality Guide indicated that our SWD students must focus on meeting their targets. Improving proficiency ratings in ELA would also improve proficiency in Math performance as well, where reading comprehension is key to success. Our strength: PS 92 is benefiting from our STEM Magnet grant, focusing on Science, Technology, Engineering and Math. Teachers participate in STEM PD and Professional Development on project based learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the number of students in grades 3 to 5 who score level 3 or 4 will increase by 3% as measured by the NYS Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Improve quality of instruction by providing effective and targeted teacher professional development. Math Coach to purchase Math materials including manipulatives to support curriculum. SWD students in grades 3 - 5 Begin 9/5/18, ending 6/2019 Offer after school and morning instruction as supplement. Lessons to include project based learning through STEM directives. Use of internet for lesson planning and implementation of GOMath curriculum. Strategies for SWD students include a focus on Advanced Literacy strategies with specific focus on vocabulary; hands-on activities and group work to promote higher level conversation among students; Differentiation of instruction to assist those students, where a different range of activities are offered to accommodate different entry levels. Families will be engaged continuously throughout the school year, first by continuing to offer periodic progress reports; September grade meetings to introduce parents to the curriculum and expectations. Periodic updates by Math Department via our PTA meetings. Strategies for students with disabilities: in the classroom setting students will work in specific groups that offer differentiation. Additional materials will be given to classroom teachers by the Math Coach. Special Education teachers will be given assistance by SESIS Specialist throughout the school year. This will be done monthly in the lab setting and with Monday PD meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement SWD students in grades 3 - 5 Begin 9/5/18, ending 6/2019 SWD students in grades 3 - 5 SWD students in grades 3 - 5 Begin 9/5/18, ending 6/2019 Begin 9/5/18, ending 6/2019 Classroom teachers; District personnel offering Math PD; GOMath PD after hours; Math Coach; Special Ed School Improvement Specialist Math Coach; PS 92 Advanced Literacy Team; District personnel offering Math PD; SWD teachers in grades 3, 4 & 5. Math Coach; Professional consultants offering Math PD; Classroom teachers in grades 3 -5 SWD classroom teachers; District personnel offering Math PD; SESIS Specialist. 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged continuously throughout the school year, first by continuing to offer periodic progress reports; September welcoming meetings to introduce parents to the curriculum and expectations. Periodic updates to be sent home in the form of periodic exams for all parents that will show student progress. Our Special Education teachers will conduct evening parent meetings to educate them on the Math material and what will be expected of students. Our Parent Coordinator will provide morning workshops based on input of Math Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Fair Student Funding to pay for Math Coach; Tax Levy to also fund per session after school staff; Title 3 funds to pay staff for ELL instruction; Title 1 SWP to pay for supplies indicated; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Math Department to monitor periodic progress through the school year specifically with end of unit testing, iReady data, and Gates-McGinitie scores; progress will be shared with parents through our periodic progress reports, supplemental to our report cards. Mid January, 2019 mid-year assessment by iReady covering first five units - given by classroom Teachers in order to determine student growth by February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Periodic assessment given by classroom teachers with supervision of Math Coach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strengths: PS 92 has set up teacher schedules that permit several opportunities for planning, inquiry work, and grade mapping. Cabinet members are utilized as coaches when teacher groups need assistance or guidance. Another strength is our ENL program made up of a vast number of ENL and Bilingual certified teachers. Our ENL students consistently show progress in ELA exams. We receive Title 3 funding which is used to purchase materials for ENL instruction, and provides increased services to our students. The 2017 New York State School Report Card indicated that PS 92 did not meet it's AYP goal for ELA. This was also reviewed during Principal Performance Observation and revisited throughout FY 2018. It can be concluded that our students must focus on improving their reading comprehension skills as per data received from the Item Skills Analysis tool, together with our Gates MacGinitie Diagnostic Reading Tests. We will continue focusing on improving the scores of our high level one and high level 2 students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ENL students from grades 3 to 5 who scored a level one or two on the 2018 NYS ELA will demonstrate progress as measured by a 3% increase in the overall percentage as measured by the 2019 NYS ELA exam. Project Based Learning will support students by promoting their focus, memory/recall, creativity and problem solving strategy skills. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Literacy Block created in school schedule to focus on ELA across the school, all grades in the same period; OTP to be utilized for classroom assistance. ENL students in grades 3 - 5 9/5/2018 through June 2019 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, ENL push-in teachers, Literacy Coach Ready Gen by Pearson utilized as a common core English Language Arts curriculum; organizing texts and routine-based instruction. Websites/software – Study Island, RAZ Kids, Flocabulary (Software house International), Brainpop, and Learning.com to improve reading strategies. STEM Magnet teacher PD to focus on PBL as well. After school program to further enforce strategies learned during the school day. Focusing instructional practices on Literacy skills that relate to aspects of the Danielson rating system (questioning and discussion techniques, differentiation, student engagement) Professional Development is given on and off site by Literacy Coach, Bureau of Education & Research, Center for Integrated Teacher Education, Division of Multilingual learners, and ELA personnel. Strategies for ENL students include an Advanced Literacy Skills approach with a focus on vocabulary; hands-on activities and group work to promote higher level conversation among students; Differentiation of instruction to assist those students, where a different range of activities are offered to accommodate different entry levels. Strategies for ENL students with disabilities: in the classroom setting students will work in specific groups that offer differentiation. Additional materials and activities will be required for classroom teachers in order to accommodate different learning styles. ENL students in grades 3 - 5 9/5/18 through June 2019 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, ENL push-in teachers, Literacy Coach. 2018-19 CEP 17 ENL Students in grades 3 - 5 9/5/18 through June 2019 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, ENL push-in teachers, Literacy Coach. Families will be engaged continuously throughout the school year, first by continuing to offer periodic progress reports; September welcoming meetings to introduce parents to the curriculum and expectations. Periodic updates to be sent home for all parents that will include ELA progress. Parent Coordinator will provide various workshops on methods for parents to support student's academic success. Likewise, outside organizations such as Power Brain will also supply parent workshops to enlighten parents on subjects such as the reducing of test anxiety and focusing. Center for Integrated Teacher Education parent workshops based on need. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 92 will offer periodic progress reports every six weeks; September welcoming meetings to introduce parents to the STEAM focused curriculum and expectations. Periodic updates to be sent home for all parents that will include ELA progress. Parent Coordinator will provide various workshops on methods for parents to support a positive learning environment. Likewise, outside organizations such as Power Brain will also supply parent workshops to enlighten parents on subjects such as the reducing of test anxiety and focusing. STEAM workshops will be provided for parents to observe the Project Based Learning model in action by students so that the model can be supported and encouraged at home by family members. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule will be created to accommodate the block of time needed in the school day. After school per session funding through TL, Title 1, and Title 3 allocations. Educational software purchased with TL funds and Title 1 SWP funds. Personnel – TL Fair Student Funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ENL Teachers from grades 3 to 5 to monitor student progress throughout the school year, specifically with each end of unit testing; progress will be shared with parents through our periodic progress reports, supplemental to our report cards. Progress Reports will be issued in October 2018, January 2019, and May 2019. By Mid January, 2019, classroom teachers will use data from November and January TCRP Running Records, iReady data, and Ready Gen end of unit tasks to assess interim progress; unit tests known as "tasks" in January will be documented as well. These progress indicators will be used as predictors of end of year student progress. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grades 3, 4 and 5 will use Ready Gen beginning of year and end of year task assessments and iReady periodic data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on findings of the 2018 Principal Performance Review Measures of Leadership Practice, the area of focus revealed that effective teacher planning and preparation needed improvement, limiting student engagement with the curriculum. Teachers did not effectively assess the understanding of all students. This was also evidenced through the ADVANCE teacher evaluation system end of year final summary reports. The last Quality Review we had in FY 2017 indicated that a lack of discussion techniques, questioning skills and ongoing teacher assessments led to a lack of improvement in verbal and written communication skills. Questions and assessments were not consistently used to diagnose evidence of learning. PS 92 has created a preparation schedule to include common planning periods for all teachers, horizontally and vertically, to allow coherent planning and inquiry investigation. Professional Development given by STEM Partners throughout the year will help improve teacher collaboration and planning. The RAP strategy (Restate, Answer, and Prove) will be reintroduced for all staff in September 2018. This high order thinking and speaking strategy will enable teachers to better assess student understanding during instruction as well as students' ability to answer questions based on text, evidence, or other text features, as is appropriate by grade level and student ability. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June of 2019, second grade student engagement with curriculum will improve as measured by MOTP teacher ratings according to the Danielson Framework in ADVANCE from a score of 2 (developing) to 3 (effective) and Gates MacGinity Screening assessments. Student support is provided for reasoning and complex and abstract thinking 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Periodic professional development will include sharing of existing successful practices by small groups of teacher teams; introduction to Project Based Learning strategies for engaging students; revisiting the Danielson component 3C engaging students in learning; concentration on depth of knowledge, level 3 and 4 where students provide support for reasoning and applied complex and abstract thinking in order to make and support answers. Frequent Walkthroughs: designed to assess teacher planning and execution of ongoing assessment strategies during instruction. Professional Development 1) on Advanced Literacy Skills strategies for ENL teachers to include a focus on vocabulary - list developed of academic vocabulary; 2) hands-on activities where student centered engagement can take place - Art based on PBL units; 3) Differentiation of instruction to assist those students, where a different range of activities are offered to accommodate different entry levels. Professional Development on strategies for students with disabilities for students to work in specific groups that offer differentiation using additional materials and activities in order to accommodate different learning styles and scaffold instruction. Families will be engaged continuously throughout the school year, by continuing to offer examples of Project Based Learning in order to share learning experiences occurring during instruction. September welcoming meetings will introduce parents to the curriculum and expectations. Second grade teachers will distribute periodic updates for all parents indicating student progress in October, January and May, in addition to regular marking periods. Parent/Teacher communication through Class Dojo. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Second Grade Teachers Begin 9/5/2018; End May 2019. Literacy AP; ENL/Special Ed AP; Literacy Coach; Math Coach. Second Grade Teachers Begin 9/5/2018; End May 2019. Literacy AP; ENL/Special Ed AP; Literacy Coach; Math Coach; ENL Coordinator; School of Visual Arts residency. Second Grade Teachers Begin 9/5/2018; End May 2019. Literacy AP; ENL/SE AP; Literacy Coach; Math Coach. 2018-19 CEP 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will provide various workshops on methods for parents to understand the benefit of collaboration among teachers. Parents will also learn how to support their children at home through involvement with the classroom teachers and STEM and other cluster teachers - Tuesday parent visitations allowing visitation with both classroom and out of classroom staff members will support this. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: PD given by Assistant Principal (Spec. Ed Specialist), Math and Literacy Coaches, ENL Coordinator. Instructional Resources: CITE to facilitate PD on differentiation; District Special Ed Dept. to facilitate PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will take place Mid January of 2019, after the second observation is complete. Administrators will then examine the eight components of the Danielson Framework. They will track teacher performance specifically in Component 3C, engaging students in learning. The HEDI scale will be used to give a specific score. This second evaluation will be used in conjunction with the first evaluation from the Fall to measure improvement for teachers as compared to previous years. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The formal observation system known as ADVANCE will be used to monitor and assess teacher progress throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the April, 2017 Principal Performance Observation visit, stating that as an area of focus, PS 92 should be improving teaching practices by providing multiple entry points and differentiated tasks to support all learners. The report indicated that there were classrooms where differentiation of instruction was not evident. PS 92 was noted as having ample time within the weekly schedule for professional development and common planning time as a strength, maintaining a culture of collaboration. Based on our most recent Quality Review Report from FY 2017, explicit scaffolds or supports in instruction for ENL's and students with disabilities were not seen school wide. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, differentiation of instruction will improve in all third grade classrooms as measured by The Danielson Framework components 1E and 3C in ADVANCE from a score of 2 (developing) to 3 (effective). This will result in increased engagement through the use of various Advanced Literacy Strategies. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly professional development, with ongoing in-school support provided by SESIS Specialist will include sharing of existing successful practices by small groups of teacher teams; revisiting the Danielson components 1E Designing Coherent Instruction and 3C Engaging Students in Learning and learning new instructional strategies and practices to better serve our students; Frequent Walk throughs designed to assess teacher planning and use of groupings to reflect multiple entry points. Scheduling collaboration periods vertically, from across the various grades. Incorporation of iReady diagnostics to identify areas of academic need. Differentiation of instruction to assist those students, where a different range of activities are offered to accommodate different entry levels. The Rosetta Stone computer literacy based program supporting differentiation of instruction. Strategies for students with disabilities: teachers will attend PD on updated strategies to be used in ENL/ICT classrooms. ENL Coordinator to review previous year data reflecting individual student progress in various components of language acquisition. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Third Grade Teachers Beginning Sept. 2018, End May 2019 SESIS Specialist; Literacy AP; ENL/Special Ed AP; Literacy Coach; Math Coach Third Grade Teachers Beginning Sept. 2018, End May 2019 SESIS Specialist; Literacy AP; ENL/Special Ed AP; Literacy Coach; Math Coach; ENL Coordinator. Parent Coordinator workshops on needs based differentiated instructional support. Periodic workshops given individually by Literacy and Math coaches on supporting the needs of children with different learning styles. Parents of Third Grade students. Beginning Sept. 2018, end June 2019 Parent Coordinator; Power Brain Facilitator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged continuously throughout the school year, first by continuing to offer periodic progress reports; September welcoming meetings to introduce parents to the curriculum and expectations. Periodic updates to be sent home for all parents that will include ELA and Math progress. Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Assistant 2018-19 CEP 24  Principal will provide monthly workshops on methods for parents to support student's academic success. Administrators will be available during PTA meetings on the first Thursday of each month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 SWP funds to pay staff for after school instruction. Title 3 funds to pay staff for ELL instruction, after school staff and for supplies indicated. Rosetta stone computer program funded through Title III Immigrant Program "B" funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will take place the beginning of February, 2019, after the second round of observations is complete. Administrators will examine the eight components of the Danielson Framework. They will track teacher performance specifically in Components 1E Designing Coherent Instruction and 3C Engaging students in learning. The HEDI scale will be used to give a specific score. This second evaluation report will be used in conjunction with the first reports from the Fall to measure improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The formal observation system known as ADVANCE will be used to monitor and assess teacher progress throughout the year. Walk through's to measure frequency and effectiveness of teacher practices. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The most recent NYC School survey reports that parents would have liked to be invited to participate in classroom visits and instruction. Overall the survey was favorable that the school respects families and nurtures common values. There was an indication that parents would like increased communications with teachers regarding student progress. Based on the “Framework for Great Schools” this goal will focus on increasing strong family – community ties. The school will improve by bringing in resources from the community by developing partnerships in the community. The “Framework” also mentions the element of trust where staff, parents, and students value each other through respect for one another, thus improving student outcomes. The strengths seen here begin with a cooperative administration. We also have a high number of staff members who can communicate in Spanish, the predominant language other than English. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Communication between the school and parents will improve by 4% as measured by responses to interim progress reports in the form of mid-year parent surveys, to foster strong family-school ties. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENL instructor; Parent Coordinator; UFT member to oversee needs assessment. Parent Coordinator; School administrator to purchase planners; Secretarial staff along with translators to create notices; Classroom teachers to attend September event; Learning Leader organization coordinator; All teaching staff for Monday PD. PS 92 will offer ENL classes to parents in the AM, conducted by an outside instructor. Instruction will be continuous, running from October 2018 through June 2019. Adult Parents Sept.2018 through June 2019 A committee consisting of parents and teachers will create templates for teachers to use to periodically send information home. Parent surveys will be analyzed to identify preferred methods of communication, web accessibility, and ultimately the effectiveness of our plan of action. The School Parent Association will discuss communications monthly to give members the opportunity to voice opinions. The PS 92 Family Room to host workshops of interest to parents such as Parenting Skills, Homework Help, Reading At Home, Family Math, Nutrition, and Children’s Health Issues, in both English and Spanish. Adult Parents Sept.2018 through June 2019 Student Planners provide information for parents on school policies in English and Spanish. Homework and notes to and from teachers are written in the planner. All notices are sent home in English and Spanish to enhance communication and open dialogue between Parent and Teacher. PS 92 will host a “Meet the Teacher Night” event in September to familiarize parents with the curriculum for the grade and with teacher expectations for their children. It also provides the parents with an opportunity to meet each teacher. Parents will be trained through Learning Leaders to work with our teachers to support our students. To enhance communication between home and school monthly calendars to be distributed in two languages to increase the amount of relevant and useful information available to parents. Professional Development sessions slated for Mondays will provide teachers with information regarding appropriate methods of communicating with parents on Tuesdays. 2018-19 CEP 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Coalition for Hispanic Family Services offers an after school program featuring Arts and Literacy. The organization also offers Art Therapy to students who are identified for the sessions by trained therapists. As our longest and closest partner, they directly support our families by offering 6 week cycles of meetings and workshops entitled "Family Art Nights" focusing on topics such as positive parenting and involvement at home. Students remain until 5:30 pm each night, offering a continuous nurturing stable environment our parents trust. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funding to pay for material and outside instructor. Human resources: outside instructors for individual PD sessions; Parent Coordinator to initiate sessions; Teacher to lead PD sessions providing curriculum updates and expectations. Instructional resources including parent agendas, parent guidebooks based on need. No schedule adjustments needed: PD usually conducted before lunch periods in student cafeteria or family room. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, our Parent Coordinator will submit increased attendance figures from sign-in sheets and agendas from monthly parent Professional Development. This will include results from mid-year parent surveys. Results will also be discussed during our February School Leadership meeting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance figures taken from monthly meetings and workshops; sign in sheets from weekly parent meetings with classroom teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The Academic Intervention services are provided to students in either small groups or one-to-one. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The service is provided to students during the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SPIRE, Sandier/Oxford Phonemic Awareness, Headsprout Vocabulary development, Reading Recovery, Fundations, Spotlight on Reading, small group instruction, Headsprout computer assisted differentiation, rewards Writing program, Thematic Approach-ELL and Dramatic Play- Oral Language play periods Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) The criteria for determining which students receive Academic Intervention Services in English Language Arts begins with end of year student data from the previous school year. End of year student data allows us to begin servicing students from the beginning of the new school year. Current and past teacher referrals for additional support are incorporated in the student service requirement determination. RTI providers conduct various assessments at the beginning of the new school year in order to confirm and/or initiate a determination of need for RTI services. Some of the many assessment strategies we employ are: Sandier/Oxford Phonemic Awareness and Teacher’s College Running Records, used for 2018-19 CEP 29 The Academic Intervention services are provided to students in either small groups or one-to-one. The service is provided to students during the school day Programs and strategies used include: Number Sense/ Number Conversation Concepts, Math Steps and Test Ready. These programs include extensive use of manipulatives and technology. Discovery Works Reading Support and Focus on Science, Passwords Science Vocabulary and Harcourt Science are used. The Academic Intervention services are provided to students in either small groups or one-to-one. The service is provided to students during the school day Mathematics Science comprehension and fluency measures . The criteria for determining which students receive Academic Intervention Services in Mathematics begins with end of year student data from the previous school year. End of year student data, including state examinations, allows us to begin servicing students from the beginning of the new school year. In addition, current and past teacher referrals for additional support are incorporated in the student service requirement determination. The criteria for determining which students receive Academic Intervention Services in Science begins with end of year student data from the previous school year. End of year student data which can include report cards and state test scores and allows us to begin servicing students from the beginning of the new school year. Current and past teacher referrals for additional support are incorporated in the student service requirement 2018-19 CEP 30  Social Studies determination. RTI providers conduct various assessments at the beginning of the new school year in order to confirm and/or initiate a determination of need for RTI services. Some of the assessment strategies we employ are similar to those used for ELA support and include: Sandier/Oxford Phonemic Awareness and Teacher’s College Running Records, used for comprehension and fluency measures. The criteria for determining which students receive Academic Intervention Services in Social Studies mirrors that of Science in that begins with end of year student data from the previous school year including report cards and allows us to begin servicing students from the beginning of the new school year. Current and past teacher referrals for additional support are incorporated in the student service requirement determination. RTI providers conduct various assessments at the beginning of the new school year in order to confirm and/or initiate a The Academic Intervention services are provided to students in either small groups or one-to-one. The service is provided to students during the school day Thematic Essay writing using DBQ’s, building vocabulary in conjunction with other ELA skills and project based learning incorporating the arts; provide interdisciplinary supports for students 2018-19 CEP 31 determination of need for RTI services. Assessment strategies we employ are similar to those used for ELA support and include: Sandier/Oxford Phonemic Awareness and Teacher’s College Running Records, used for comprehension and fluency measures. Services are provided based upon requests by classroom teachers when agreed upon by members of PPT Committee. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The Academic Intervention services are provided to students in either small groups or one-to-one. The service is provided to students during the school day At Risk service providers employ various testing procedures and provide short term supports in order to give support and also to determine if ongoing supports are needed. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) One student was identified as STH on the RATH screen; further stated as "P" permanent housing status. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH liaison will ensure the rights and services are in compliance with McKinney-Vento Act; liaison will identify homeless students, coordinate transportation, and provide free school meals to all students. Galaxy amount of $500 to purchase school supplies when needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. not applicable 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Credentials for new candidates are verified by the Borough Support Center HR Director. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract high-quality highly qualified teachers to our school include: Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the Borough Support Center HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals; participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited; interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System, the Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool, and the NYC Teaching Fellows Program; establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing; maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices; providing teachers with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities. Professional Development sessions are given based on individual teacher needs. Staff development activities in our school are scheduled to permit a lab or classroom visits and grade meetings, either during common prep periods or during Monday afternoon professional development periods created by the recent UFT contract to discuss new strategies and give teachers a chance to meet in small groups. Our Technology teacher attends monthly tech meetings to keep current with trends. Professional development is also provided for by the Borough Support Center ELA representative periodically at different locations. The representative is readily available to come to the school to offer support and answer questions. Technology used to support staff includes Smart Boards and comparable Epson projectors, bringing internet technology to each classroom. Learn.com which includes Aha Math is used for our lower grade students (purchased using Title I funds). We also utilize iPads in several classrooms where students use them in small group activities. Scheduling to support Professional Development is provided by the school administration to facilitate common periods when teachers meet. This year we created common preparation periods each day to teachers by grade. A Literacy Block was included in the schedule again this year during the second period each day. Substitute teachers are available to allow individual teachers to attend outside professional development (paid with Title I funds). 2018-19 CEP 35  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administrators develop their own assessments to identify individual needs among faculty members. Data from state tests, ELA and Math, and NYSESLAT exams, help them to pinpoint teacher effectiveness. Evaluations from the previous year, as well as informal observations taking place continuously, enable them to identify the needs. Administrators meet with cabinet members to review professional development opportunities throughout the school year. As these opportunities are identified, individual teachers are selected to attend professional development sessions. The faculty at PS 92 is also given the opportunity to select PD opportunities they themselves have selected, upon approval from the principal. A Professional Development (PD) Team was created to decide what PD opportunities the staff would be able to attend. PD is also facilitated by teachers themselves. Our Coaches and lead teachers attend monthly meetings given by our Borough Support Center at different locations. The representative is readily available to come to the school to offer support and answer questions. Technologies such as Smart Boards bring Internet technology to individuals. Scheduling allows us to facilitate common periods when teachers meet. Staff members who attend PD outside the school use this time to turnkey information to their peers on the same grade, depending on applications Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents are invited to a Parent Orientation in early September. They are also included in all parental activities, where higher level thinking is discussed. Parents are also included in all forms of celebrations throughout the year. Technology is used to further assist them in the transition. Our Pre-K classroom works with a centrally mounted Smart Board, along with multiple iPads. 2018-19 CEP 36  Curriculum is aligned vertically in the Next Generation Standards. Conversational prompts lead into Ready Gen activities when they move on to Kindergarten. Professional Development for early childhood grades includes Pre-K teacher. Early intervention includes speech and T5 screening by our school psychologist. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 92 involves a school committee made up of administrators and teachers, the Measures of Student Learning committee. A meeting held in June lets members plan out the work for the next school year. School teams attend a training provided by the NYC Department of Education, which focuses on the evaluation and development system. The training is focused on the Measures of Student Learning, and the Advance teacher evaluation system. Teachers are further educated on the decision steps they would participate in the upcoming months. The process includes choosing assessment options for all teachers, reviewing growth measurements, and how to present these recommendations to the principal for finalization. The teachers on the committee represent each grade level to determine local measure assessments, and which targeted population they would select. The committee meets informally to discuss individual grade needs and concerns. Team members discuss the pros and cons of each assessment types, and availability for our particular school. Teachers attend professional development weekly where they discuss and are enlightened on the use of data to drive instruction. This PD further educates them on the Measures of Student Learning and the teacher evaluation system Advance. Measures of Student Learning specialists assigned to our district assisted with the second year implementation of this system. By mid-September the committee submits their recommendations to the principal, who submits them to the Department of Education via an interactive online tool 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 484,959.00 X 2018-19 CEP 37  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 69,587.00 32,462.00 0 5,431,734.00 X X X 5a, 5b 5a, 5b 5a, 5b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 38  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 92 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 92 Queens will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● creating a Family Room on the first floor near the school entrance that is open to all parents. Workshops of interest to parents are held such as Parent Skills, Homework Help, Reading At Home, Family Math, Nutrition, and Children’s Health Issues are given in both English and Spanish. ● A Social Worker is assigned by the Pre-Kindergarten Program. ● Student Planners provide information to parents on school policies in English and Spanish. Homework and notes to and from teachers are written in the planner. ● All notices are sent home in English and Spanish, and PTA meetings are held in both languages as well. ● PS 92 hosts a “Meet the Teacher Night” event in September to familiarize parents with the curriculum for the grade and with teacher’s expectations for their children. It also provides the parents with an opportunity to meet each teacher. 2018-19 CEP 40  ● Parents are trained through Learning Leaders to work with our teachers to support our students. Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 1. Giving professional development to provide teachers with information regarding appropriate methods of communicating with parents during conferences, as well as ways the agenda book can be a tool for communication. 2. Providing strategies teachers can use to prepare for parent-teacher conferences. 3. Encouraging teachers to invite parents to celebrations of children's writing and other appropriate celebrations. Inviting Title I parents to participate in an annual review the second Thursday in February, 2019. 4. Distributing the parent involvement policy to parents in the fall of 2018. 5. 6. Parents are also invited to all assembly programs, and to classroom celebrations of children’s work. 7. Ensuing that parents are an integral component of the School Leadership Team. Additionally, we will 1. Communicate clearly and effectively with parents. 2. Enhance communication between home and school. 3. School monthly calendars are created in two languages to increase the amount of relevant and useful information available to parents. Increase parental awareness of school policies and student expectations. 4. Provide parents with opportunities to become an instrumental presence in their child's education. 5. Provide workshops for parents on various topics based on interest and need. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 92 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 41  The school will ensure high quality curriculum by:  Providing books, materials, and resources that support high quality instruction  Developing professional development plans that support the curriculum and recognize the strengths of each member of our staff  Providing quality education  Maintaining high expectations  Knowing the material  Motivating students  Actively engaging all students  Assigning appropriate homework  Differentiating instruction  Each administrator will support the education and well-being of our students by:  Establishing clear expectations  Being a positive roll model  Being prepared  Celebrating student work and appropriate behavior frequently Each teacher and member of our support staff will support home-school relationships provide by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Ensuring parents are an integral component of the School Leadership Team. Treating everyone fairly, with respect Advocating for students Communicating with parents, students, and teachers regarding the education and social well-being of our children Providing many opportunities for our parents to participate in the education of their children Informing parents of all meetings in a timely manner, and in their home language  Communicating with parents, when appropriate I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Student Planners provide information to parents on school policies in English and Spanish. Homework and notes to and from teachers are written in the planner. All notices are sent home in English and Spanish, and PTA meetings are held in both languages as well. ● PS 92 hosts a “Meet the Teacher Night” event in September to familiarize parents with the curriculum for the grade and with teacher’s expectations for their children. It also provides the parents with an opportunity to meet each teacher. Parents are also invited to all assembly programs, and to classroom celebrations of children’s work. 2018-19 CEP 42  PS 92 Queens will support parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a Family Room on the first floor near the school entrance that is open to all parents. Workshops of interest to parents are held such as Parent Skills, Homework Help, Reading At Home, Family Math, Nutrition, and Children’s Health Issues are given in both English and Spanish. ● A Social Worker is assigned by the Pre-Kindergarten Program. ● Parents are trained through Learning Leaders to work with our teachers to support our students. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Each parent will support his/her child’s learning by: ● Communicating with teachers and administrators ● Participating in school activities ● Monitoring attendance ● Having child come to school on time ● Teaching respect and responsibility ● Requiring child to complete homework each day, and signing this homework ● Providing pencils and other supplies necessary for both homework and class work ● Reading and responding to notices ● Signing tests and report cards ● Volunteering at the school if possible ● Supporting the Discipline Code for the City, the School, and the class ● Holding my child accountable for his/her choices Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Each student will take responsibility for his/her education by: ● Being prepared to work (books, pencils, paper) 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Listening and following directions ● Participating in class activities ● Following the Discipline Code for the City, school, and class ● Wearing my uniform every day ● Asking for help if I do not understand ● Completing homework every day ● Reading at least 30 minutes every day after school ● Giving all notes and tests to our parents to sign ● Resolving conflicts in positive, non-violent ways ● Working hard to be a good citizen in my class and in my community 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After school The Title III Supplemental program for ENLs provides ENL and Bilingual students additional academic support in grades K through 5. According to the EDAT, ENL students who were administered the NYSESLAT, 23 students scored the highest in reading modality, grade 2 - 10 students scored the highest in speaking, grade 3 - 25 students scored the highest in writing, students in grade 4 - 11 students scored equally in writing, reading and speaking. In grade 5 - 25 students scored the highest in the speaking modality. The Title III Supplemental program will focus on our K through 5 ENL students. Starting in the fall of 2018 students in grades 1-5 will use i-Ready for our weekday after school program. i-Ready is an interactive program that boosts student proficiency level, accurately measures students ability and accelerates student growth. We will focus on the four components of the English Language which include Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing domains. Students will follow areas in vocabulary building, reading comprehension, writing, discussion of ideas, cultural integration, content reading in social studies, and civics. In addition, it stimulates higher-order thinking skills such as researching and organizing information; evaluating and comparing ideas; and applying knowledge. These lessons include response to graphic information, short passages, comprehension of dialogue and information, picture-based story, listening for academic content, and fact-based essays. Instruction is given incorporating ENL strategies in the English Language. Additionally, this program increases students' academic strategies within the content areas.The program will begin in the fall from October 2018 through April 2019 for 1.5 hours a day, three days a week. Instruction will be given by 6 certified ENL and/or Bilingual teachers and one certified ENL/Bilingual Assistant Principal who will supervise this program. It is aligned to the Learning Standards for English as a Second Language (ESL Standards) with teacher directions for each student page, extension activities, instructional notes for teachers, reproducible answer sheets with sample rubrics, skill analysis and proficiency charts, the parent letter, and Connecting Assessment. In addition, teachers and students will utilize smart board activities that correspond with this program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development given for the Title III program will be in session for one hour per month. Nine certified ENL/Bilingual teachers will attend the required Professional Development for this program. Our certified ENL/Bilingual Assistant Principal will train teachers. The topic will include i-Ready program introduction which includes ENL standards, 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development emphasis on Common Core, Bilingual Common Core, Connecting Assessments, graphic organizers, rubrics, and an introduction of the i-Ready program to parents. ENL Coordinator to provide ongoing professional development for continuing Title III programs. The PD will enhance the four strands which are Listening, reading, writing and speaking by focusing on the four Advanced Literacy hallmarks. The program New York ELL's provides PD focusing on audio instruction, essay writing, grammar, and conversational prompts. All PD sessions to be documented and kept by ENL Department. All attendance sheets kept by Parent Coordinator in Community Room. The annual schedule will be continued on a monthly basis, beginning in October of 2018, approximately ten sessions, usually the first Monday of each month. Each session will last one 50 minute period during the extended school schedule observed each Monday afternoon. The Title III Supplemental program for ENLs provides ENL and Bilingual students additional academic support in grades K through 5. In the Fall of 2015 ENL levels changed to Entering (beginner), Emerging(low intermediate), Transitioning(intermediate), Expanding(Advanced) and Commanding (proficient). The Title III Supplemental program will focus on our K through 5 ENL students. Starting in the fall of 2018 students in grades 3-5 will use Easy English News for our weekday after school program. Easy English News will reinforce lessons addressing the four components of the English Language which include Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing domains. Easy English News is aligned to the common core standards; the content will focus on beginners through advanced students in the following areas, vocabulary building, reading comprehension,writing, discussion of ideas,cultural integration,content reading in social studies, and civics. In addition, it stimulates higher-order thinking skills such as researching and organizing information; evaluating and comparing ideas; and applying knowledge. Students will address current news and civic articles, writing prompts and vocabulary discussions. These lessons include response to graphic information, short passages, comprehension of dialogue and information, picture-based story, listening for academic content, and fact-based essays. Instruction is given incorporating ENL strategies in the English Language. Additionally, this program increases students' academic strategies within the content areas.The program will begin in the fall from October 2018 through April 2019 for 1.5 hours, three days a week. Instruction will be given by 8 certified ENL and/or Bilingual teachers and one certified ENL/Bilingual Assistant Principal who will supervise this program. Our 2nd grade students after school program will begin in October 2018 - April 2019. This program will also be supervised by our certified ENL/Bilingual Assistant Principal. Finish line NEW YORK ELLS and ReadWorks materials will be used for our 2nd grade after school program. It is aligned to the Learning Standards for English as a New Language (ENL Standards) with teacher directions for each student page, extension activities, instructional notes for teachers, reproducible answer sheets with sample rubrics, skill analysis and proficiency charts, the parent letter, and Connecting Assessment. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 47  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: The parent engagement activities for the Title III program will occur once a month from October 2018 through June 2019. Topics that will be addressed by the Assistant Principal supervising the After school program will be: Introduction to i-Ready interactive program, community events, resources for students (library programs) and additional concerns regarding homework and school issues. Prior to the start of this program, a letter in both students home and English languages will be sent to both students and parents notifying them of the After school program and the parent activities available. At all parent teacher conferences and related events PS 92 provides translation services through appointed staff, phone translation services authorized by the Department of Education, and through DoE approved translation vendors who send translators in person to parental events. The parent engagement activities for the Title III program will occur once a month from October 2018 through June 2019. Initially a questionnaire will be conducted by Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator to identify need. Topics addressed will include: Introduction to Finish Line-NEW YORK ELLS materials, Easy English News, Next Generation Standards, community events, resources for students (library programs) and additional concerns regarding homework and school issues. Prior to the start of this program, a letter in both students home and English languages will be sent to both students and parents notifying them of the After school program and the parent activities available. Invitations to all parent workshops will be sent home to all parents of Title III and parents of ENL's two weeks prior to all activities. All records such as agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations (including all languages) will continue to be maintained by our Parent Coordinator in our Family Room on the first floor. The schedule of workshops are given on a monthly basis, total of 9 sessions, usually the second Tuesday of each month from 9:00 am to 10:00 am. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Harry T Stewart Sr. School Borough Queens School Number 092 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pasquale Baratta Coach Pana Ioannou ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher JoAnn Brogna Teacher/Subject Area Delfina Sotelo/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Sonia Torrent/ESL Related-Service Provider Genevieve Schultz Superintendent Dr. P. Composto Assistant Principal Esther Reyes Coach Eileen Sanders School Counselor Joanna Ventura Parent Veronica Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Ana Melendez Field Support Center Staff Member Jenny Ann Ying Ying Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 27 21 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 3 21 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 842 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 217 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.77%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 1 3 1 2 1 4 1 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 5 0 0 0 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In our ENL classrooms we use TCRWP Assessments. These assessments include letter/sound identification, concepts of print, word identification and running records. In our Bilingual classes we use Fountas & Pinnell Spanish Reading Level Assessment "Sistema de Evaluacion De La Lectura" as their tool to track progression in students native language. Tracking student running record levels allow teachers a consistent method to track student progress in reading. The ReadyGen Literacy Program provides English Language extension for both our Bilingual and ENL classrooms. The data from the above assessments provide insight in setting rigorous goals for our ENL population. The Fountas & Pinnell Spanish Reading Level Assessment provides insight in student knowledge in their native language. Combined with the TCRWP Assessments teachers can formulate data that informs their short term and long term instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 51  All self-contained, push/pull out ENL and Bilingual teachers use curriculum mapping, programming and planning in all second language development. The AMAO estimation Tool also help teachers make data driven instruction for ENL and Bilingual students. The results of the data are specified to each sub-group. Various areas are identified including home language , grade level, students ELA/Math performance, attendance and age. This data provides teachers with the information to differentiate their classroom and small group instruction. Additionally, our Literacy and Math coaches are given ENL and Bilingual students data. This data will provide our coaches with information to help differentiate classroom instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Currently, we use TCRWP running records and NYC performance tasks to assess our ENL and Bilingual students from K-5. These assessments helps us to determine our students academic levels. Upon the results of the TCRWP running records and NYC performance tasks, our RTI team which consists of certified ENL and Bilingual pedagogues who analyze running records and NYC performance tasks to identify areas of need. As a result the RTI team will establish the need for Tier I, Tier II and Tier III intervention. Additional our K-4 bilingual classes use Fountas & Pinnelll, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results to determine levels of instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structure we have in place to address interventions once the summative data for all of our ENL and Bilingual classrooms are as follows: RTI instruction which includes Tier 1, Tier 11 and Tier 111, After and before school instruction, Language Power program and various differentiated practices from our Literacy and Math Coaches. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students who score below grade level of performance on the annual English Language Proficiency assessment, which consists of ENL Assessments (running records, on-demand writing, performance tasks, end of Unit assessment in Go Math and ReadyGen), will be given RTI instruction. RTI instruction includes Tier I, Tier II and Tier III intervention. ENL classroom teachers provide Tier I intervention within their class. Tier II interventions are provided by 2 RTI providers, AIS providers, At-Risk speech and SETSS. In the past our Reading Recovery program targeted the at risk 1st grade population on a 20 week cycle. Our RTI model is given in a small group instructional environment on each grade by a certified ENL and/or Bilingual pedagogue. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. This year our AMAO data indicates our ENL students made progress. Our data patterns reveals that our students grades K -2 displayed an approximate 30% increase in our ENL scores to advanced and proficient levels. However, our students in grades 3-5 displayed an approximate 20% increase to the advanced and proficient levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures we have in place to disseminate these findings and make adjustments to our programs include replacing On Way to English Program and implementing the Language Power Program.Teachers found that using Language Power addresses each specific level for differentiation instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 52  a. Freestanding ENL program. In our English as a New Language (ENL) self-contained classrooms, the Stand-alone model students are grouped according to their ENL level. ENL instruction is 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA integrated (180 min each unit). The Emerging students instructional time begins with 2 units of study per week (360 mins). Stand Alone ENL instruction which includes .5 unit of study in ENL (90 min), Integrated ENL consists of 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 min) and Flexibility .5 unit of study can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 min). A Transitioning student includes 1 unit of study per week (180 mins) .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 mins) .5 unit of study Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 min). An Expanding student consists of 1 unit of study per week (180 min) in ENL/ELA or other Content Areas (Science or Social Studies). Commanding (former ENLs) will receive .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. Currently, ReadyGen is our ELA program and is used with integrated ENL instructional time. GoMath and Science is used for our Expanding and Commanding students and for our students who have Flexibility instructional time. Our ENL program for both Stand-Alone ENL includes On Our Way To English and Language Power programs. b. TBE program. If applicable. In our TBE program the content areas includes Math, Science and Social Studies. GoMath and Explore Science materials are used in both English and Spanish. The bilingual classroom teacher provides Social Studies instruction in both languages. In using the Advanced Literacy strategies students are grouped by proficiency levels in small group instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes for each program model as follows: In both our Transitional Bilingual programs and English as a New Language programs teacher instruction for ENL and Bilingual students begins with 2 units of study per week (360 min)for an Entering student. This includes 1 unit of study in ENL Stand-Alone ENL instruction and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA integrated (180 min each unit). For an Emerging student instructional time begins with 2 units of study per week (360 mins). Stand Alone ENL instruction which includes .5 unit of study in ENL (90 min), Integrated ENL consists of 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 min) and Flexibility .5 unit of study can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 min). A Transitioning student which includes 1 unit of study per week (180 mins) .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 mins) .5 unit of study Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 min). An Expanding student consists of 1 unit of study per week (180 min) in ENL/ELA or other Content Areas (Science or Social Studies). Commanding (former ENLs) will receive .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. ReadyGen is our current ELA program. Our ENL program for both Stand-Alone ENL includes On Our Way To English and Language Power programs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Science and Social Studies are presented to our Transitional Bilingual (TBE)classrooms and ENL classrooms through classroom teacher instruction. One to two periods of instruction is given through a specialized content area teacher such as Science and Social Studies. Our literacy program ReadGen delivers content area materials through literacy in the form of textbooks and additional reading materials both in the students native language(Spanish) and English. Our Math program is GoMath for grades K-5 and are in all ENL and TBE classrooms. For ENL classrooms the program is offered but in TBE classrooms the math program is given in Spanish which is the native language of our students and all textbooks are in Spanish as well. Typically, the ENL program is given in English only, however support to Native Language speakers for content area subjects is given by the availability of textbooks and informational text in Spanish. Native Language is given by ENL teachers who understand and speak Spanish. Students are also grouped heterogeneously with peers with similar cultural backgrounds. In following the CCLS, for our self-contained ENL classes and our Push-in classes, all content area subjects are done in English using ENL methodologies. In our Bilingual classes teachers teach all instruction as specified in the Transitional Bilingual Program 2018-19 CEP 53  model. As stated in the ENL guidelines, ENL class instruction is taught in the English language. NYSESLAT strand scores are reviewed to identify areas requiring special focus. RTI support, including test preparation, is provided. There are after-school and Saturday programs for our ENL students which support language development. Students participate in all test preparation activities, both during the school day and in after-school programs. These students receive supplementary services under Title III. Assessments are conducted several times during the school year (monthly and twice a year) in all subject areas so as to identify needs, which are then addressed in individual and small-group settings. P.S.92 ensures students are actively involved with our school choir and band activities. Small group instruction and after-school programs are available to meet the diverse needs of our ENL population. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are assessed throughout the year with running records, on demand writing, and GoMath in their native language. In the content areas we use teacher created assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A SIFE student who enters our school will be assessed using the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and MLS which is given in the students Native Language. MLS screener is given in either Vocabulary or Reading Comprehension in the students Native Language. Upon the results MLS and SIFE evaluation ENL and Bilingual SIFE students are given additional instruction in both ENL/Bilingual classroom and Push/Pull out models using Language Power, Easy English News and Teacher Created Materials. To support our Newcomers, additional instruction is given. Newcomers have small group instruction given by a certified ENL teacher. On a weekly basis differentiated small group instruction is given focusing on students vocabulary, reading comprehension, writing, in ELA and the content area. All materials are based on students level and language support. In our self-contained and push-in ENL programs the instructional focus for our Developing and Long Term ENL population is based on the English Proficiency Level and AMAO Tool of the students. Differentiated instruction is given in both ELA and content area. Instruction will be given based on the results of the AMAO Tool. GoMath, ReadyGen, On our Way to English and Language Power reinforces ENL/ELA and content area strategies. Former ENLs are given 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area by a certified ENL teacher using small group instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All our ENL/Bilingual and ELL-SWDs classroom students includes smart boards in both ENL and Bilingual classrooms. Both ENL/ Bilingual and ELL-SWDs students have either iPads or Learning pads available for instruction. Our ENL-SWDs receive services according to their IEP's; services include speech - our staff includes two full time Bilingual/ENL speech teachers, certified ENL teachers push-in for 360 minutes and/or 180 minutes according to the students ENL level . OT(Occupational Therapist) and PT(Physical Therapist) give the require mandated services for our ENL-SWDs. At this time our Bilingual SWDs are placed in a bilingual class and receive SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Service). All Self-contained and ICT, ENL classes follow the CCSS aligned ReadyGen literacy and GoMath programs. The instructional strategies teachers used to support ELL-SWDs with academic content and language acquisition include Language Power program in a small group instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As dictated by the students IEP, flexible programming enables the student to spend time in a Full Time ENL class while spending other periods with a Special Ed classroom and/or receiving SETSS from a qualified provider. The criteria used to place an ENL-SWD would be determined on placing the student in the Least Restrictive Environment, which would include the make up of the ICT class, the severity of students disability and the students IEP. Classrooms with ENL-SWD students have a specific literacy block time. This literacy time enables a second teacher to push-in and assist the classroom teacher with small group instruction. In many cases, the push-in teacher is the ENL provider so that ENL strategies are implemented. Differentiating and 2018-19 CEP 54  scaffolding instructions according to the needs of the students ensures that IEP goals are met. This enables the teacher to satisfy IEP Goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted Intervention is based on literacy for all content area subjects. An RTI Spanish bilingual teacher will evaluate students level for science, social studies, ELA and math. Based on reading levels the teacher will formulate small group instruction. Our RTI (response to intervention) service providers use small group instruction to reinforce our literacy, math, science and social studies. The RTI providers support our ENL students with additional differentiated but rigorous material 4-5 times a week. Progress of our ENLs reading levels are continually monitored using TCRWP Assessments.com. Spanish Bilingual Running records are given to students in our K-4 TBE classrooms. All at-risk speech and guidance interventions are given in the students Native Language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The NY Cares organization, The Queens Theater Program, Before/After school program,The Queens Theater school program and Brain Power wellness are new programs that are in place for the school year. NY Cares provide students with socialization and community participation skills. The Queens Theatre school program gives students in grade K-5 the ability for creative self expression. In our Before/After school program students are given the opportunity to increase their academic levels in all content areas. Brain Power Wellness are given the tools in the classroom to reduce stress and anxiety through physical, emotional and cognitive exercises. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we did not close our Bilingual programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At PS 92 all parents and students are notified of all available school programs. Letters are sent home to parents or guardians in the parents preferred language with content of the program indicating times, date and length of program. Programs include but not limited to our chorus and band programs. In addition, the New York ELLS program helps ENL students develop and strengthen reading and writing skills through the content areas. Our Academic Enhancement help after-school program is designed for ENLs to give supplemental reading/writing assistance. We also have two school programs in which all students, both ENLs and Non-ENLs participate: NY Cares and The Coalition for Hispanic Family Services Arts and Literacy programs provide supplemental reading and writing curricula. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For our ENL push in program, TBE and ENL self-contained all CCLS strategies are implemented: scaffolding concepts, graphic organizers, modeling, visual aides, dance, music, and art. Our Special Education teacher includes pre-teaching vocabulary, visuals, hands-on, multi-sensory approach, cooperative learning techniques, and connecting the lessons to students’ prior knowledge. Leap Pads, and books on tape are utilized both in English and Spanish. Vocabulary is introduced through the content area. A conversational-based classroom provides language practice for students. Thematic units for Social Studies and word walls in all content areas assist students. Our native language materials are included in our literacy program. ReadyGen delivers content area materials through literacy in the form of textbooks and additional reading materials both in the students native language(Spanish) and English. Our Math program is GoMath for grades K-5 and are in all ENL and TBE classrooms. For ENL classrooms the program is offered but in TBE classrooms the math program is given in Spanish which is the native language of our students and all textbooks are in Spanish as well. Content area subject is given by the availability of textbooks and informational text in Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? According to the CCSS our reading program (ReadyGen) incorporates strategies for our Bilingual/ENL student population. ReadyGen delivers content area materials through literacy in the form of textbooks and additional reading 2018-19 CEP 55  materials both in the students native language(Spanish) and English. Our Math program is GoMath for grades K-5 and are in all ENL and TBE classrooms. In Spanish TBE classrooms the GoMath program which assessments are given in Spanish the native language of our students. Additionally, TBE classroom Literacy assessments include Bilingual running records which is given on a quarterly basis. Typically, the ENL program is given in English only, however support to Native Language speakers for content area subject is given by the availability of textbooks and informational text in Spanish. Students are also grouped heterogeously with peers with similar cultural backgrounds. There are after-school and Saturday programs for our ENL and Bilingual students. These programs are available to our Native language speakers and support language development . 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have designed a preparation schedule that facilitates common prep periods for all the grade levels. This allows teachers to plan and strategize on their grade level, discuss assessments and their results, and do long term planning using data driven instruction. In addition, once a month an administrator meets with the grade levels to discuss best practices, new implementations, and any concerns. Our teachers attend ReadyGen workshops, including those specifically geared for ENLs. All our professional development within the school addresses instructional practices that are appropriate for ENLs. Our Borough Support ENL Specialist provides PD specifically designed to provide strategies and analysis of language development. As a result of our Borough Support Center ENL support, we have purchased computer software, text books, and professional reading material to be used as resources for our teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, our school does not share a building with any entity. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this point in time, we do not have any programs of activities for ENLs before the beginning of the school year. However, throughout the year our newly enrolled ELLS are included in all activities that are presented in our school. These activities are Before/After school programs include Hispanic Cultural Institute, all school trips and performances. Our school counselor, parent coordinator, Literacy/Math coach and ELL Coordinator are always available to address the needs of students in both academic and social areas. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school provides bilingual Spanish classes for grades K-3 and ENL on grade K-5. At this time we do not offer any other language other than Spanish and English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time we do not have a Dual Language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We currently have twenty seven certified ENL teachers and four Bilingual classroom teachers- Ms. J. Brogna, Ms. S. Torrent, Ms. A. Arana, Mr. E. Ventura, Ms. C. Bohr (Special Education), Ms. A. Rollo (Special Education), Ms. E. Papas, Ms. R. Coy, Ms. M. 2018-19 CEP 56  Cali, Ms. T. Mico, Mr. B. Ehrlich, Ms. M. Nunez, Ms. B. Marrandino, Ms. M. Cassimatis, Ms. M. Guzman, Ms. N. Simone, Ms. A. Guerrero, Ms. J. Rosinsky, Ms. J. Durant, Ms. G. Garcia (Special Education), Ms. S. Armieri (Special Education), Ms. F. Veintimilla, Ms. M. Torres, Ms. C. Segovia, Ms. E. Sanders, Ms. H. Beller (Special Education), and Ms. D. Sotelo. On staff our Paraprofessionals are Ms. Villas, Ms. Walter, Ms. Cruzado, Ms. Serrato, Ms. Alvarado, Ms. Gonzalez and Ms. Castillo. Ms. Joanna Ventura is our Guidance Counselor, Ms. Laurentano is our Occupational therapist and Ms. Abayev is our Physical Therapist. Our Speech Therapists are Ms. G. Schultz, Ms. T. Coleman, Ms. Y. Cassimatis and Ms. Pena. Our secretaries on staff are Ms. D. Alvarez, Ms. J. Balducci, and Ms. T. DiGioia. Ms. Ana Melendez is our Parent Coordinator. We train all staff on the ReadyGen curriculum, and provide professional development to all classroom teachers. All grades have a common preparation (prep) period and a meeting period once a month. The Literacy Coach provides professional development to new and experienced teachers. We coordinated with the CITE program to provide Saturday Professional Development for our ENL teachers. Our monthly Professional Development dates are as follows: Oct. 2017: 5,19,26; in Nov: 2,9,16,23,30; in Dec: 7,14,21; in Jan 2018: 4,11,25; in Feb: 1st,22,29; in March: 7,14,21,28; in April: 4,11,18; in May: 2,9,16,23; in June: 6,13,20,27. All our professional development within the school addresses instructional practices that are appropriate for ENLs which include grade level planning-designing strategies for classroom instruction, analyzing ENL student work, developing strategies for incorporating Academic Vocabulary, and designing differentiated instruction. Our teachers attend ReadyGen workshops, including those specifically geared for ENLs. In addition our staff attends Professional Development provided by CITE, BER and the Department of English Language Learners. All programs are either given on Monday during our Professional Development block or at another location. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. By attending the NYSSCA and ACA conferences, Guidance Counselors ensure that students, families, and the entire school community is familiar with promotion and graduation standards, and encourage the participation of all students in a rigorous instructional program aligned with their academic needs. The Guidance Counselor notifies parents of workshops and open house events for our 5th grade students who will attend middle school in the following September. The workshop events include but are not limited to "The Young Women's Leadership School Astoria Open House", The Louis Armstrong Middle School Fair, District 30 Middle School Fair, and the "Hunters Point Community Middel School Open House". In May/June students take a walking field trip to our local middle school. Professional Development is given to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English Language Learners for a minimum of 15% of language acquisition. These Professional Development sessions focus on best practices and integrated language strategies for ENLs. For bilingual and ENLs teachers a minimum of 50% in Professional Development hours are given concentrating on language acquisition and core content alignment. Our Monday Professional Development sessions include Designing Strategies for Classroom Instruction, Designing Differentiated Instruction, Developing Strategies for Incorporating Academic Vocabulary and Analyzing Student Work. Additionally, we have off-site presenters which include CITE and BER providing Professional Development for our ENL population. All materials including agendas and attendance are kept in the Principals office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with the parents of ENLs are given separately from the scheduled Parent Teacher Conferences. The ENL classroom teachers and push in ENL teachers schedule an individual conference time to meet with their ENL parents. At this meeting ENL/Bilingual teachers discuss the progression of the students language development. The goals include but not limited to additional reading/vocabulary materials(Easy English News, Time4Kids, Studies Weekly) given to help increase students reading and comprehension level and available Before/After school programs Upon the scheduled meeting 2018-19 CEP 57  the teacher will document time, date and topic of discussion for their students. All correspondence is kept in a secure location. Also, parents are given a monthly calendar which provides our parents with notification of school meetings that are given during that month. The Parent Coordinator distributes the calendar of events to each classroom teacher to distribute to the students. The monthly calendar is also posted in our school office, family room and hallways. Translation services for written materials(newsletters and notices) are given to the ENL Coordinator or classroom teacher who complete an online translation request. The classroom teacher can request several native language translations as needed. On-site translation services is an outside service contracted by the Department of Education. At the request of the classroom teacher or administrator the ENL Coordinator will call the translation service to reserve a translator to attend Parent teacher conferences and/or IEP meetings given in parents native language. Over-the-phone interpretations services are available to all Department of Education personnel who come into contact with limited-English-proficient parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Coalition for Hispanic Family Services provides after school activities for ENL students. On a 6 week cycle both students and parents are invited to Family Activity Night. Family Activity Nights include student performances that reflect the previous weeks curriculum. After the performance, parents are invited to attend a parent workshop. A Saturday Academy is provide for our parents who are unable to attend a weekday activity. The Saturday Academy includes parent workshops, parent and student activities which are provided by CITE. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pasquale Baratta, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Harry T Stewart Sr. School School DBN: 30Q092 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pasquale Baratta Title Principal Esther Reyes Assistant Principal Ana Melendez Parent Coordinator JoAnn Brogna ENL/Bilingual Teacher Veronica Gonzalez Parent Sonia Torrent/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Delfina Sotelo/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Pana Ioannou Eileen Sanders Coach Coach Joanna Ventura School Counselor Dr. Composto J. A. Ying Ying Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ENL Genevieve Schultz Other Speech Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 09/01/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30 School Name: The Harry T Stewart Sr School Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Brogna Melendez ENL Coordinator PC No Yes Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To establish the needs of our parents a Home Language Identification Survey is completed during the registration period. One of the main focuses in administering the HLIS is the Part III section. The Part III section indicates in what preferred language should communication occur with parents or guardians. In addition to the HLIS student biographical information on ATS will indicate the students Native Language. Parents also complete an emergency contact form to provide contact phone numbers, and addresses. Teachers also complete a Classroom Home Language Survey of the children in their classrooms. Information regarding how many children speak different languages is forwarded to the main office to assist in determining how many copies must be distributed in each language. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Our Home Language Surveys indicate that our school population consists of 819 Spanish, 26 English, 3 Arabic and 7 Asian families whose parents selected the preferred language for both written and oral communication. Our Spanish, Arabic and Asian families request to have information in their preferred language. The Translation & Interpretation Unit translates information in the families preferred language. English 25 % English 25 % Spanish Mandarin Arabic 74 % 0.5 % 0.5 % Spanish Mandarin Arabic 74 % 0.5 % 0.5 % 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 62  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families The documents that are typically translated and are distributed include all school correspondence: ex. parent orentation, parent teacher conferences, field trips,school closings, afterschool programs, afterschool shows and events,class and school newsletter, school calendar, all NYS testing information, PTA events, School Leadership information, school handbooks and students grade curriculum. These items are distributed to our school families throughout the school year. September through June 2019/approximately distributed the first Monday of each month. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 1) All translated documents are created by PS 92 staff members. 2) Documents are initially given to ENL Coordinator who then sends them electronically to Department of Education translation services. The time frame for translations is usually two to three weeks. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 63  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school The formal face-to-face meetings teachers and staff have with parents consist of Parent-teacher conferences, Special Education Meeting(EPC), PTA/ School Leadership and upon request with either parent or teacher, Tuesday afterschool meetings. Informal meetings include discussions with the school nurse, student dismissal, and classroom presentations. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PS 92 utilizes the Department of Education translation services by telephone (over the phone translation services) and on-site translation interpreters. Each Tuesday afternoon from 2:50 pm to 3:55 pm. Parent Teacher Conferences throughout the school year. ENL Parent Teacher Conferences on January 3, 2019. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. PS 92 has a school website that posts all public emergencies. Individual emergencies notify parents by telephone, either by office personnel, classroom teachers, school nurse, guidance counselors and school administrators. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The ENL Coordinator provides information through a faculty professional development session. Information is given through handouts and video presentations showing the steps to take for parent translations. PD Committee to create session time for this PD set for the first month of school. Information for first parent teacher conference on September 17th to be given during opening day faculty conference, September 4th, 2018. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 64  PS 92Q is fulfilling this requirement by doing the following: a. PS 92Q has provided parents with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their home language in the month of September. b. PS 92Q has displayed at various locations in the school lobby, and by the elevator entrance on each floor, signs in the most prominent languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. c. The school posts Language ID guide at the security desk and main office. d. A Welcome Poster is displayed throughout the entrances and exits of the school building and in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Together with our Parent Coordinator and ESL Coordinator we collect information from parents on the quality and services available to our school families. We use parent surveys translated in the families Native Language. At our monthly PTA and School Leadership meetings information regarding school events, assessments, closings and any other school information are given in the Native Language. 2018-19 CEP 65 
