2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q093 School Name: I.S. 093 RIDGEWOOD Principal: EDWARD SANTOS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Ridgewood I.S. 93 342400010093 6, 7, and 8 School Number (DBN): 24Q093 66-56 Forest Avenue, Ridgewood, NY 11385 718-821-4882 Phone Number: 718-456-9521 Fax: Maria Gucciardino mgucciardino@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Edward A. Santos Scott McMillen Edith Aparicio Maria Trapasso RajanKarmacharya Sabrina Sierra (GRYCBeacon) CBO Representative: Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50th Avenue, Corona NY 11368 Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 592-3357 Phone Number: 718) 592-3770 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: . lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: . . Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Edward A. Santos Scott McMillen Edith Aparicio Rajan Karmacharya Rebecca Parker Maria Trapasso Ann Valentin Lauren Pizzolla *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Thomas Nofi Stacy Johnson PriscellaGuzman Lourdes Lascano Sasha Peart Vanessa Laurenano Maria Jimenez Jaclyn Hogan Sabrina Sierra Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent CBO-GYRCBeacon CBO-GYRCBeacon 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to prepare all of our students for the rigors of high school, college, and the world of 21st century careers in a safe and caring learning environment. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As per our 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot and other more current data sources, Ridgewood Intermediate School 093 is a Title I Universal Meals school with 1121 students from grade 6 through grade 8. The school population comprises 2% Black, 71% Hispanic, 17% White, and 9% Asian students. The student body includes 15% English language learners and 22% special education students. Boys account for 50% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 94%, on par with the city average. Spanish is spoken at home by about 50% of families as per the Home Language Survey. Other major languages spoken at home are Arabic, Polish, and Chinese. Thirty-two languages are represented at I.S. 93. Currently, Arabic speakers represent 5% of our student body, second in size to our Spanish-speaking population. We have 48 classes, which now include thirteen ICT, eighty self-contained special education, three ENL stand-alone, and seven honors classes, two of which are dual language Spanish. As stated in our current school brochure, I.S. 93 offers:  Standards-Based Academics: Students discuss, read, and write about interesting and arguable topics in all subjects on all grade levels.  Discovery and exploration in science through labs and field trips with opportunities to earn Regents credit.  Our world languages and dual language programs: Students learn Italian or Spanish aimed at earning high school credit.  Learning choices for all students in academics, sports, and arts such as music, drama, and visual arts.  Leadership programs such as Beautiful Me, Unleashed, U.S. Navy Cadets, and the National Junior Honor Society.  Extra help with academics from teachers and peer tutors.  Peer mediation to foster positive social interactions, perspective, respect, and understanding.  Technology: Computer Science for All is being integrated this year aligned with the NYC initiative. Robotics is part of our Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Mathematics program. STEAM students use the latest LEGO Robotics materials and resources as they prepare for 21st century careers. Computer coding as an after-school program is a new addition to our STEAM program.  The Arts:: Visual Arts: Students create and exhibit their own drawings and paintings throughout the year. Art skills are essential for success in numerous careers. Drama: Drama participants build the confidence and speaking skills needed in many careers, not just in theatre. Drama club students manage and perform in two plays each year for students, staff, and parents. Music: Students in music class are always working with instruments. We have an after-school music club, which includes a drum line. They also perform at our school and across the community.  Community Service Learning: Students get involved in helping others through local, national, and international organizations like Adopt-a-Soldier, Fundepaz International, US-Africa Fellowship, and Breast Cancer Awareness. Service learning opportunities are abundant at I.S. 93. Our students also tutor other students at I.S. 93 and local elementary schools. 2018-19 CEP 10   Sports: Students can choose sports activities before and after school such as soccer, basketball, volleyball, football, badminton, handball, and cheerleading. Each year, students participate in our exciting teachers vs. students games. We also organize student tournaments both within the school and with other schools in the district. Our cheer team has competed on a national and regional level at Disney and Virginia Beach.  Partnerships: Digital DELLTA Arts Connection: Now in our fourth year, our ENL students learn to work and think like artists. An inquiry-based approach engages students in authentic arts-making experiences and provides opportunities for self-expression. Small group work facilitates collaborative discussion and decision making. Peer assessment practices help students analyze and improve their work. This program is grounded in research that shows students develop language skills in an engaging, authentic context that they care about, and that provides opportunities for self-expression. Cross-Age Partnerships with Our Feeder Schools – PS 71, PS 305, and PS 88. Our students and students at the elementary schools work together in math and ELA. Greater Ridgewood Youth Council: Our partners for over two decades, the after-school Beacon Program offers sports, arts, dance, games, homework help, and community connections.Queens Library: We partner with the Queens Library right across the street from I.S. 93. At this principal branch, you child has access to one of the largest modern book collections as well as their Cyber Center. Homework help is also provided.Urban Advantage: We are proud to team up with Urban Advantage, providing our students, teachers, and parents with science experiences at premier NYC museums. US Navy Armed Guard Cadets: Many parents enroll their children in this after-school program at 93 because it offers the mental and physical discipline and reinforcement needed to succeed in life.  Parents: Parent activities are plentiful: School Leadership Team, PTA, Safety Committee, chaperone events, share special talents, help raise funds, and participate in workshops and training opportunities, including technology. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special populations include our English Language Learners, our students with IEPs, as well as our students in shelters. Our ELLs need English language support through dedicated staff and instructional resources. The needs of IEP students are unique and varied. The needs of our shelter students also vary and are monitored by our social worker and guidance team. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools we have made the most progress over the past year is Rigorous Instruction. We met our 17-18 goal to expand the number of 8th graders succeeding in the Algebra course and exam, which this year included SWD in a self-contained setting and ICT. We increased the number of participating classes from two honors classes to three additional classes - general education, 12:1:1, and ICT. The average score on the Regents was 78%. Our areas of focus for this year as discussed and developed with input from our School Leadership Team (SLT): Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, based on current data, we will achieve an 8th grade average of 75% on the Algebra Regents Exam, including SWD and ENL students. This year, all 8th graders will take the Algebra course as well as the Regents. Our school-wide instructional focus for the year is academic language development. We are building upon last year's focus on strategies that promote academic language in the classroom. This year, we are using Word Work as our cornerstone professional text. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q093 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1099 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 84 85 1 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 87.9% % Reduced Lunch 15.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 71.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.15 1% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 128 128 94.2% 6.8% 21.7% 1.9% 9.2% 0.5% 8 21% 7.4 32.4% 58% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We met our 17-18 goal to expand the number of 8th graders succeeding in the Algebra course and exam, which included SWD in a self-contained setting and ICT. We increased the number of participating classes from two honors classes to three additional classes - general education, 12:1:1, and ICT (60 to 118 students). 88% scored proficient or higher. 28% scored mastery level. Overall average score on the Regents was 78%. Overall SWD was 60%. This year all 8th graders will take the Algebra I course - approximately 350 students (including 1 ENL stand-alone, 2 self-contained IEP, 3 ICT, 2 honors, and 6 general education classes). We are considering AIS and RTI for identified students to strengthen their performance potential on the Regents this year in support of our goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will achieve an 8th grade average of 75% on the Algebra Regents Exam, including SWD and ENL students. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in the bottom 1/4 in a general education Algebra class (Class TBD) identified using Performance Adaptive Assessment for Algebra will receive two days per week intervention by one of our math teachers for a period of 4 to 6 weeks to improve high leverage math skills needed to receive proficiency on the Algebra Regents. Intervention will take place during the school day (after school if needed). A new set of students will be targeted at the conclusion of the current time line. Five students in a general education Algebra class in bottom 1/4 tbd December 10 - January 20 . . . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . . . . . . . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents of 8th graders, and parents of targeted students in particular, will receive notification of our goal. Workshops will be organized and offered to parents regarding the Algebra Regents. Links to instructional supports such as online videos will be provided to parents. Parents of targeted students will receive separate progress reports based on Performance Assessment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Technological devices such as iPads, Chromebooks, and Lenovo Laptops will be used by targeted students. IXL will be used by all Algebra teachers, and by those working with targeted students in particular, to help us achieve our goal of 75% average Regents score. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Performance assessment will be used at the end of the time line. Performance portfolios will be maintained showing evidence of targeted math areas. Assessment will be administered midway - 1/5/19. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series will be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We have numerous avenues that support students on a social-emotional level. We want students to enjoy a sense of belonging, feel good about themselves, others, and the learning environment. Students have choices and opportunities to connect with others through the arts, sports, and collaborative activities in class. Individual and small group counseling conducted by our guidance counselors, SAPIS counselor, and social worker Beautiful Me – an ongoing program that supports the self-esteem of female students; the program is run by female teachers Unleashed – a six-week program that helps female students develop confidence, leadership skills, and social awareness through advocating for the care of puppies in need Lunch Hour Advisory – sixth grade students elect to meet with our health teacher during their lunch period to discuss matters of personal interest AIS – students can meet with teachers during auditorium time for either academic help or advisory-related support Grade-wide Initiatives: starting in November, guidance counselors and deans implement a grade-wide program that promotes social-emotional health: Grade 6 – Fill the Bucket; grade 7 – Random Acts of Kindness; and grade 8 – I Love Myself Because School-wide Community Service - We will continue with our peer mediation program; that is, students helping students to resolve conflicts. In order for this to occur, we need to:  Train new interested staff  Train new interested students  Coordinate mediation schedule that allows for students to mediate  Conduct monthly meeting to discuss impact of program Peer tutoring is a new area between our students and younger students at P.S. 305. Additionally, we are building up our student council, previously referred to as student voice, to include a wellness aspect in alignment with the NYC initiatives around social emotional support and wellness. We are also focusing on further anti-bullying education and RFA activities. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will further raise positive student perceptions and enhance our social-emotional supports for students by expanding our RESPECT Initiative to include a Student Council and the use of surveys to measure improved perceptions. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Office of Youth Support and Development (OYSD)-sponsored RFA training for staff All staff October- Mr. Nicolosi .OYSD and NYC Thrive Kognito Anti-bullying Training All staff November Tanisha Naughton Mediation training conducted by IS 93 staff - once per month Student Council lunch with the principal to discuss issues - one grade at a time starting with grade six. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students interested in becoming mediators November through March Trained facilitators and student mediators led by Ms. Trapasso One representative from each homeroom December through February Mr. Santos How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops/presentations and other resources for parents during the school day and in the evening. Paul Bonney, SAPIS Counselor, will be one of the presenters during the day. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance counselors, deans, and teachers who expressed interest in becoming mediation facilitators; OYSD peer mediation program training and curriculum; monthly meetings by trained staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Facilitators will meet monthly to discuss successes and challenges. Quantitative data will be reviewed as well as input from peer mediators and student clients. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student surveys and percentage of conflicts that remain resolved after mediation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs assessment in progress. Last year, teacher teams met consistently every other Monday afternoon. Grade-subject teams were given the autonomy to identify areas of academic weakness and work collaboratively to improve student performance outcomes. Teams worked in learning cycles that averaged about six weeks. Teams measured the impact of their efforts to close out their respective cycles. Teams engaged in three cycles for the year. Teams were given time to conduct research to help expand their knowledge and efforts. Teams were encouraged to experiment with strategies. A review of cycle assessment results reported by teams indicates that teams were successful in their efforts. Teams reported that outcomes were improved, suggesting that they would have a positive impact on state and local measures. For example, a review of the grade 8 team summary chart shows that the team focused inquiry cycle 2 on understanding the difference between slope and y-intercept rules and calculations as an area of need. The need came from the math department’s baseline. The impact of the team’s efforts, which involved scaffolds, was an increase in student outcomes (i.e., 11.26% to 84.81%). In fact, an analysis of math data for 2016 shows that our grade 7 and 8 students outperformed the city on average in virtually all math standards. This year, we want to examine closely the needs that teams agree to focus on and the process they use to determine the need, looking for how the identified need aligns with standards and assessments. Does the need lead to an improvement of practice and leverage larger improved outcomes. Recent sample of a team’s collaborative work: Cycles of Learning: Teacher Team Summary – Cycle# ___1__ Grade: _8__ Subject: __E Point Person: ______Saguto__________ Dates: From ______10/16___to ___________ Area of Need Evidence of Need Effort Evidence of Effort Impact Evidence of Impact 2018-19 CEP 21  (e.g. interpreting visuals; citing support from visuals) (e.g. data used) (e.g., strategies the team agrees to use to address the identified need; common assessment to measure impact) (e.g., actual strategies implemented, artifacts used, lesson plan) (e.g., % increase or number of students who achieved success; for which students or subgroups?) (e.g., graded work samples, profile sheets, progress trackers, unit assessment results) Entrance/exit slips using passages to identify relevant details CR and short prompt writings Unit vocabulary as it applies to literary elements/signposts Signposts – building upon prior knowledge, moving towards literary devices 7th grade ELA – 49% average success rate on this type of question Baseline – 5% of students can do this (emphasis on exclusively) CR – midway Final essay – lit. analysis Scaffolds to address various approaches to significant Text marked in larger chunks for students to focus Word banks as needed to address language interfering with meaning Signpost guidelines Ability to exclusively identify in reading and convey in writing the significance of relevant details Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 22  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all department teacher teams will continue to engage in at least three inquiry cycles and measure the impact of each cycle on teacher practice and student performance outcomes using informal assessments at the conclusion of each cycle. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A minimum of two Inquiry Learning Cycles . . . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers by grade and subject Oct.- Dec. Jan.- Mar. Supervisors of each department . . . . . . . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will focus on providing parents with information regarding the impact of our teams' efforts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduled for Monday afternoon every other week; framework for capturing need, effort, and impact; designated point person per team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Impact of each team's efforts to improve student outcomes will be reviewed two times per year - 6 to 8 week cycles Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 24  Specially designed chart and samples of student work for each team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We will continue with academic language development as our instructional focus to ensure that effective strategies are embedded practices. The needs are still under evaluation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will embed at least two research-based strategies specifically designed to build academic language in the classroom as measured by observations, surveys, and informal assessments. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monday Professional Learning Opportunities All teachers Based on PL Inter-visitation Opportunities Mentoring and Coaching - PCT and Model Teacher . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Calendar All interested teachers New teachers and interested non-new teachers Supervisors by subject area PCT and Model Teacher; supervisors by subject area Supervisors by subject area How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. informative correspondence Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly professional learning time (Monday after student dismissal); copies of the professional text for every teacher, classroom observations - A Practical Guide for Vocabulary Instruction published by CIPL. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  Midpoint benchmark will consist of survey and samples of student work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey and student work to assess for increased appropriate use of academic language by subject area Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Under review by the SLT and Parent Coordinator Current opportunities for parents and community member to get involved in our learning community: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Survey of interests to the parents at large Parents January PTA and PC Rank interests Set up activities/events . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . . . . . . . . . If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. tbd Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent Funds, Title I Translation Funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance and surveys will indicate parental engagement and participation in activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Primarily surveys 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Students who are hold-overs; students at risk for failing the subject Mathematics Students who are hold-overs; students at risk for failing the subject Science Students who are hold-overs; students at risk for failing the subject Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategies employed will depend on an instructional diagnosis of the students requiring support. Great Leaps - SWD in self-contained classes who are have difficulty decoding Strategies employed will depend on an instructional diagnosis of the students requiring support. Great Leaps - SWD in self-contained class who are weak with computational skills Strategies employed will depend on an instructional diagnosis of the students requiring support.TBD Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one-to-one in the classroom; peer tutoring is currently being explored as a method When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Currently in class during the school week; AIS pull-out is also used. Pending budgetary restraints, before/after-school/Saturday options will be implemented. Small group and one-to-one in the classroom; peer tutoring is currently being explored as a method Currently in class during the school week; AIS pull-out is also used. Pending budgetary restraints, before/after-school/Saturday options will be implemented. Small group and one-to-one in the classroom; peer tutoring is currently being explored as a method Currently in class during the school week; AIS pull-out is also used. Pending budgetary restraints, before/after-school/Saturday 2018-19 CEP 32 Social Studies Students who are hold-overs; students at risk for failing the subject At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Mandated counseling and students identified as needing counseling informally; struggling academically/socially/emotionally as per parents, staff, and students Small group and one-to-one in the classroom; peer tutoring is currently being explored as a method options will be implemented. Currently in class during the school week; AIS pull-out is also used. Pending budgetary restraints, before/after-school/Saturday options will be implemented. Small group and one-to-one Pull-out -various time during the week Exit Project Program for 8thgradersPID(final safety net later in the year) Strategies employed will depend on an instructional diagnosis of the students requiring support. Exit Project Program for 8thgradersPID(final safety net later in the year) Mandated Counseling by guidance counselors, SAPIS counselor, psychologist, and social worker 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Current records indicate that we have 67 STH attending I.S. 93. Our social worker, pupil accounting secretary, and procurement secretary work closely to communicate with STH parents to verify this number and the needs that these students have. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP 34  Funds are set aside to help provide supports to STH as required. These funds are used to provide school supplies, basic attire, transportation to/from special events, and subsidize participation in school events that may otherwise require a prohibitive financial cost. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We are a collaborative team environment. Retention efforts include reimbursement for attendance at professional PD outside of our school building. Having a mentor to meet with weekly for the first year promotes retention. Offering leadership experiences and the chance to work with a team of colleagues also help to retain HQ teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning is driven by observation trends, assessment results, and teacher input. PL takes different forms and is reflected in different ways: our school-wide instructional focus (this year it is supporting student autonomy in the classroom), teacher team collaboration, specialized skill training (i.e., SESIS), teacher choice/interest; etc. PL this year is organized around three primary areas: Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework; special education knowledge and skill level; and supporting autonomy in the classroom. Our school-wide instructional focus is 3c – Engaging Students in Learning through student choice. Teachers also have professional learning choices around 3b (questioning/discussion techniques) and 3d (using assessment in instruction). Special education PL is differentiated by need in areas such as finalizing IEPs and alternate assessments. PL is also provided in the form of new teacher mentoring, coaching in literacy across subjects, classroom inter-visitation, collaborative team planning and assessment analysis, and interdisciplinary team work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 36  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). . Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). . 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We work in grade level subject teacher teams. Teachers contribute to various unit assessments used. Teams use the results to drive their instructional efforts and design additional assessments to measure the impact on learning outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) x . Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal . 0 x . 2018-19 CEP 37  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local . . . x x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 38  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Ridgewood I.S. 93, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Ridgewood I.S. 93 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Ridgewood I.S. 93, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on the NYSESLAT, state ELA and mathematics examinations, interim results and on-going classroom assessments, our ELLs require supplemental academic support in the following areas: literacy development, academic language, oral reading proficiency and content instruction. In 2018, one hundred sixty seven students took the NYSESLAT. Sixty three students advanced one proficiency level. Fourteen students advanced two proficiency levels and one student advanced three proficiency levels. Fifty seven students stalled and six regressed. These students are strongly encouraged to attend the Title III program as our school's highest priorities. Our modality of greatest need is the writing modality and will be the major focus of the program. All ELLs are invited to attend a supplemental program and choose from the following: 1. Before school on Tuesdays from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. (1 class) 2. After school from 2:25 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. on Thursdays (2 classes) The program begins the first week of November and ends in May. A building supervisor oversees of the program. A school guidance counselor also participates in the program by assisting in community building activities. Students are grouped by sub-group (e.g., SIFE, LTE, ELLs with special needs and proficiency level) within two grades - to the extent possible. A maximum of 20 students in each class. Content follows our school's curriculum in each subject area. All classes are taught in English with native language support via bilingual dictionaries and native language libraries. A supplemental workbook (TEAM Tookits: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery by Continental Press) is also provided. All students in the program use technology (i.e., ipads, laptops, and headphones). Ipad use includes various applications: voice recording, speech to text, text to speech, spelling, reading and visual representations. Additional materials used to support English Language Learners are: Duolingo (for newcomers), Brain Pop ESL (for transitioning students), Castle Learning and MyOn (for expanding students), dictionaries in multiple languages, audiobooks and leveled instructional texts for social studies and science, as well as, Math Scholastic Magazines. Differentiation and scaffolds are provided as needed based on student's NYSESLAT levels. Each licensed teacher conducts lessons via a workshop model (i.e., Mini-lesson, work period, and closing) teaching literacy skills through the content areas. Students engage in listening, speaking, reading and writing during each session. IS 93 now has over 200 ipads for use solely by ESL teachers. Our ELL Coordinator maintains attendance records for all classes within the program. Invitations to the program are offered in five languages (English, Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese) and copies are also kept on file. Attendance sheets are submitted and kept on file with the ELL Coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: With a large population of ELLs (233 total including 5 SIFE and 40 LTE's), we feel the need to support our teachers with on-going training. Our in-house ELL coordinator attends outside training and turn keys the information following each workshop. All teachers of the Title III program attend. In addition, all teachers in the school who teach ELLs or former ELLs are invited to attend these workshops. All professional development opportunities from the DELLSS, Fordham Rbern and Queens North Professional Development are shared via email. Teachers volunteer to sign up for various opportunities. Common planning during the school day has been put into each teachers' program to ensure the sharing of best practices and to plan collaboratively and to analyze student work to determine reading and writing interventions for ELLs. Teachers of ELLs participate in two book studies each year. Professional learning sessions are held on Friday mornings from 7:00 to 8:00 a.m. Certified ELL staff facilitate each session. The Book Studies are facilitated by the ELL Coordinator. All ELL staff are invited to attend all professional learning sessions. Book Studies, focusing on "The ELL Teacher's Toolbox: Hundreds of Practical Ideas to Support Your Students" by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Sypnieski,are limited to ten attendees. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: With 233 current ELLs (75 are former ELLs), communicating with families is a challenge. However, we believe that parents should play an active role in their child's education regardless of their language barrier. Use of the NYC DOE Translation Unit has been essential to maintaining contact with parents of varied languages. Below is a list of activities that I.S. 93 offers to ensure greater parent engagement in our school community: The Parent Coordinator, Mildred Reyes, conducts monthly meetings and/or workshops, providing translation when needed. A monthly newsletter (available in English, Spanish) will be sent home via backpack, email, as well as, posted on our school's website. The newsletter informs parents of important dates, a Principal’s message, parental tips, and noteworthy school events/awards. Workshops (High School Application process Homework help, Bullying, Pupil Path, Gmail, NYC Access, etc.) are offered to parents at various times throughout the year and as requested/needed by individual parents, translation in native language is offered as needed/requested. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities A bilingual “Parent Library” is available with valuable resources to our parents. Computers are also available for use in our school's library. Targeted audience workshops for parents of students with disabilities and ELLs regarding the State Standards, Special Education Services for school age children, Gmail, Homework help, Activities to do with your child, OPWDD, Pupil Path are offered (organized through our Parent Coordinator) throughout the year. Translation equipment has been purchased for meetings and translators are contracted as needed through Legal Interpretation Services. This service is on-going (available during all PTA meetings, Parent Orientation Night and Parent-Teacher conferences). Pupil Path training is also provided on a one-to-one basis when requested. Monthly PTA meetings encourage parent participation in school events (i.e. fundraising, chaperoning school dances, class trips, etc.). Our Beacon Program provides support for our ELLs every day after school and on Saturdays through workshops and field trips. Parents are invited to participate in all ELL Adult and GED classes. We also have a partnership with the Queens Public Library which is located directly across the street from our school. The library offers our students tutoring and homework help daily from 3:00 - 6:00 p.m. Parents are encouraged to accompany their children. Parent needs are determined by: Surveys, personal requests, meetings and through email. Our parent coordinator responds immediately via email and/or sets up necessary meetings (with translation) when requested. Surveys are analyzed by the SLT. Changes are made based on survey outcomes. High school workshops (given by our school guidance counselors and parent coordinator) assist families in choosing the best High School. Depending on their needs, they are oriented on a one to one basis (with translation as needed). Individual ELL parent meetings are organized in addition to PTC to discuss students’ language progress and EDAT data. These meetings are led by students’ teachers also with the help of translation services. Meeting notices are sent home in the parent's preferred language using DOE translation services. Parent communication is maintained during the year through the following (with translation, to the extent possible, in English, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese and Polish): • I.S. 93 website and Pupil Path • Backpack notices and emails • Tuesdays – Parent Engagement Meetings/Telephone Conferences from 2:30-3:00 P.M. • Monthly parent newsletter • Parent Coordinator bulletin board and bill board outside of the school • Telephone Message System for daily attendance/lateness and important announcements in English and Spanish. Lastly, teachers are provided 40 minutes weekly to conduct the following: meetings with parents, telephone conferences, email and/or drafting correspondence to parents. Parent workshops offered during the school day are generally scheduled for one to two hours. Our Parent Coordinator maintains logs (via parent signature) of all meetings, as well as, copies of all agendas and invitations. 2018-19 CEP 49 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name I.S. 93 Ridgewood Intermediate School Borough Queens School Number 093 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Edward Santos Coach Gloria Serna ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Pizzolla Teacher/Subject Area Sharfia Cadogan Teacher/Subject Area Richard Cardino Related-Service Provider Danna Manheim Superintendent Madelene Taub-Chan Assistant Principal Catherine Fratangelo Coach N/A School Counselor Debby Hartz Parent Lillian Esposito Parent Coordinator Mildred Reyes Field Support Center Staff Member Giuvela Leisengang Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1150 2018-19 CEP 51 Total number of ELLs 177 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.39%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. Sp School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? I.S 93 uses various assessments to assess literacy skills of our ELLs. ELLs in ICT and self-contained Special Education settings are assessed with Fountas and Pinnell or Achieve3000 lexile level assessments. Long Term ELLs are assessed with QRI-4 and newcomers with teacher created baselines and/or diagnostic exams. Additional ELL Lexile level assessments are conducted through Achieve3000 (which offers pre and post tests). The NYSITELL and Spanish LAB are also given to our newcomers. It provides us with initial data regarding early literacy skills in reading, writing, and listening in English and Spanish, respectively. We place students in classes based on these results. The Multilingual Literacy Screener and mathematics for our newcomer SIFE students in their native language. We use these results to determine the grade level of our SIFE newcomers. These tools show students' reading level and math computation levels in English and the available native language in order to provide teachers with further information about the students' abilities. These tools provide teachers with instructional baselines in order to properly support student learning. 2018-19 CEP 52  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All ENL teachers collaborate with the mainstream teacher in an integrated setting. Dually certified teachers work in stand-alone setting. Testing is done for all students during their scheduled ENL periods. In addition to professional learning sessions conducted on Monday afternoons, a common planning period is provided for all ENL teachers to meet and analyze data of the subgroups once a week. ENL and content area teachers work together to analyze student assessment data and create a plan of action to meet the students' needs based on assessment results. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessment guides instruction for teacher training and guides teachers in making instructional decisions. The data is analyzed by the ENL Department at professional learning sessions and departmental team meetings and used to appropriately group students, as well as, to provide targeted assistance. The school's Instructional Leadership Team also analyzes the data to make decisions based on greatest needs first. The ELL periodic is a consistent assessment that shows growth and predicts NYSESLAT scores by accurately providing teachers with scores based on modality–based longitudinal data that drives instruction and class placement. The cooperating ELL teachers share periodic results with the content teachers who also use it to drive instructional goals. Based on the results of the Periodic Assessment, students tend to struggle most with the listening modality. For this reason, teachers include more listening objectives and activities in daily instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Department members meet during common planning periods to analyze and share data and plan for teaching strategies/interventions. ENL cooperating teachers then meet with their cooperating teachers during professional periods to share the insights from the ENL departmental meetings. AIS periods are sometimes used for individual interventions. Teachers use data profile sheets for individual, class and grade-wide analysis. A master list including language proficiency level based on 2017 NYSESLAT results, years of service, baseline data results and home language is updated periodically throughout the year and discussed at common planning and professional learning sessions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A we are a 6-8 school. However, we use the Wilson Reading Program with identified at-risk ELL students who are reading far below grade level. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic, State ELA and Math and NYC SS MOSLs are used to evaluate and inform our ELL population. The NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT are used to place students in the appropriate classroom setting. For example, students who score at an EN or EM level are placed in self-contained ENL classrooms. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All results are disseminated to ENL and content teachers in September. The ENL department meets during a scheduled common planning period and then shares results/strategies with content and cooperating teachers during professional periods. As well, Google Docs is utilized by all ENL and cooperating teachers to share related documents and student information (i.e., extracurricular activities, extension programs, all data results, attendance) throughout the year. The ENL coordinator also keeps a "Master" spreadsheet of data. As needed, student class placements are changed to meet their needs. All involved teachers are then notified about the change. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 53  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Freestanding ENL program, the instructional model is a stand alone model for our true beginner/newcomer ELLs (Entering and Emerging) using curriculum that is aligned with our regular ELA curriculum but modified/adapted for ENL students. These follow a block schedule to the extent possible. The beginner/ newcomer ELL classes receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. They also receive 180 minutes of integrated ELA/ENL instruction to build English Language skills through the content area . Teachers who are dually certified in ENL and a content area can teach both stand alone ENL and Integrated ELA/ENL. Teachers who are not dually certified will be provided with a co-teacher. Transitional ELLs and some Expanding and Commanding ELLs receive services via a co-teaching model in their ELA class. Expanding/Commanding ELLS may receive ENL services from a certified ENL teacher in another content area . Students are grouped by grade and by proficiency level to the extent possible. All classes are departmentalized and students move from room to room with their class. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. A Spanish-English Dual Language/ICT class of approximately 30 students will begin in grade 6 for the 2017-2018 school year. The class follows a 50:50 model; that is, half the students will be ELLs and half will be English proficient. The ENL students come from homes where the home language is Spanish. The English proficient students may or may not come from homes where Spanish is spoken. This program is unique insofar as it will be an ICT, where there will be ENL students with IEPs among the participating students. Regarding the target languages, Spanish will be used as the language of instruction in math, social studies, and science every other week. English/Spanish language arts as well as English/Spanish a new language will be provided weekly. Bilingual teachers have been programmed to teach in this dual language program. Two bilingual special education licensed teachers are assigned to this program. Our Dual Language program is communicated to parents and students as a three-year program and a pathway to the NYS Seal of Bi-literacy. This is a 2-way dual language program in which languages alternate weekly. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the ENL Program, Entering and Emerging Students receive 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL with an ENL provider. In addition, they receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA with the ENL provider who is dually certified or with an additional co-teacher. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of either stand alone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or other content area from a push-in ENL teacher. This is a 2-way dual language program in which languages alternate weekly. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the ENL freestanding program model, content is delivered in English with native language support. ENL teachers provide students with native language glossaries and dictionaries, and when available, with native language textbooks and readings. We currently have resources in Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Tibetan, Polish, and Albanian. ENL teachers are bi- or multilingual and provide on the spot support with vocabulary and comprehension development if needed. The school uses a workshop model 2018-19 CEP 54  (balanced literacy approach) for all content areas. The ENL teachers use the same model adapted with QTEL techniques and scaffolds. Content and ENL teachers are encouraged to plan cooperatively to the extent possible during common planning periods. All teachers use weekly Teacher Team meetings to study student work and data to drive their instruction. Content teachers know who the ELLs and Former ELLs are in their classes and discuss the needs of the ELLs in their classes at team meetings. The ENL stand alone classes use self-created ENL curriculum which varies across grade levels and is inter-disciplinary. The integrated ENL/ ELA classes follow the standard ELA curriculum for their grade level. The ELA department follows the Engage NY curriculum. The ENL and other content classes also follow the regular mainstream, grade level appropriate curriculum. Some materials and programs implemented in ENL classrooms include English 3D, Duolingo Brainpop and Achieve3000 on iPADs, The Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Grammar Links and Vocabulary Links from Continental Press are also used as additional resources for individualized or small group language interventions. Teachers also include visuals and translations into their lesson presentations. The Dual Language program I a “one week English/one week Spanish” approach to learning two languages through content over the course of three years. Ideally, students acquiring and learning English as a second language are doing so through the content areas when the language of instruction is English. Comparatively, students acquiring and learning Spanish as a second language are doing so through the content areas when the language of instruction is Spanish. The bilingual teachers are required to differentiate and scaffold instructions to address the fact that some students are developing proficiency in a second language (target language) through academic content while others are learning academic content in a language they are already considered proficient in. The curriculum in the dual language program is the same as the curriculum in English-only program. subjects: mathematics, reading, language arts, science, social studies, etc. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To the extent possible and in languages spoken by our staff, the initial evaluation is based on informal interviews in students' native language about their studying/reading habits, attitude towards education, as well as, hobbies and interests. New comer students are encouraged to write in their native language in the beginning of the year. Students are encouraged to read books in their native language. Their understanding of books written in their native language can help teachers to understand their literacy needs in the L1. Exams (i.e, the MOSL and the New York State Assessments) are provided in both English and the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL and content teachers are trained to meet the needs of ELLs with interrupted formal education. Training includes QTEL, interclass visitations, professional study groups, and coaching. Teachers also meet to collaborate during common planning periods. These professional development sessions include instructional techniques for SIFE students. SIFE grants are used to train teachers of ELLs in content area programs such as Achieve3000 and Academic Vocabulary Toolkit. These programs are used with our SIFE students as a form of academic interventions. Two hundred ipads with apps designed to assist students with learning in content classes are employed in ELL classrooms. Newly emigrated students and students who are here for less than 3 years and still haven't exited the transitioning level are placed in a self-contained ENL newcomer class (one on each grade level). These classes follow general education curriculum that is scaffolded and modified to suit student language levels and supplemented by additional language lessons. Within these classes, students are grouped by their proficiency levels and the progress they are making in the class. Teachers typically conduct small group instruction for SIFE students. SIFE students are also provided with supplemental materials that can help them to acquire foundational skills that they may be missing. 2018-19 CEP 55  Our Long Term ELLs follow our general education curriculum with an ENL teacher pushing in to the ELA or Social Studies class and differentiating lessons depending on individual students’ needs. Literacy and language needs by modality are determined in September and re-evaluated bi-monthly to adjust differentiated instruction. Teachers meet during common planning and coaching conferences to discuss specific instructional needs. Literacy is developed through individual, guided and group instruction. Students are also given native language support such as bilingual libraries, technology, translation glossaries, and dictionaries. Long-term ELL grants are used to train teachers of ELLs in content area programs such as Achieve3000, English 3D and Academic Vocabulary Toolkit. These programs are used with our ELLs as a form of academic intervention. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL content and special education teachers are trained to meet the needs of ELL students with IEPs. The ELL-SWD follow the Engage NY common core aligned ELA curriculum with appropriate scaffolds.Students receive scaffolded materials created by both the ENL and SPED teacher In addition to this curriculum, appropriate scaffolds are used, they include graphic organizers, native language support .read alouds, comprehension strategies, context clues strategies, decoding strategies including word formation (syllables, suffixes, prefixes) and writing partners where high and low students work together to edit writing pieces. Guided instruction in small groups and one on one conferences are just a few of such strategies. In addition, we have a wealth of technological resources to foster academic success for our ELL-SWDs. Every student has access to either a laptop or a tablet. Through these technological resources, ELL students can access BrainPOP and BrainPop ESL, Achieve3000, Duolingo, Castle Learning and MYon. Teachers use audiobooks and other apps that support student development with visulals and audio resources. All classrooms are equipped with substantial classroom libraries ranging from pre-primer to high school level reading material, as well as audiobooks and online read alouds. Often after reading a chapter of their assigned book once, students also have the option of listening to the chapter on audio book to enhance comprehension. Students have regular access to IPADS and headphones which can facilitate this activity. We are also in year 4 of the DELLTA Arts Program and ELLA arts program that teaches literacy through arts and has been very popular among our Special Education ELL population. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curriculum maps have been designed for use across content areas. ELA and ENL departments have created dropbox accounts as a way to facilitate the sharing of materials for sub-groups. The curriculums maps include modifications for ELLs and SWDs. These modifications provide differentiation and scaffolding where needed. Teachers provide small group instruction and one on one conferences. In addition, programming considerations are made with regard to student placement. At the end of each year, teacher teams meet in an articulation meeting in order to discuss the proper placement of each ELL student. ELL-SWDs are placed in classes where additional support is provided all day (e.g. 12-1-1, ICT or SETSS classes) in addition to the ENL instruction. ELL-SWDs are invited and encouraged to attend extracurricular activities, Title III supplemental programs and frequently use technology in the classroom. ELL-SWDs are integrated with general education students in their talent and gym classes. All students are allowed to choose which talent course they wish to take (Art, Dance, Music or Robotics) ELL-SWDs are given the opportunities in these classes to work with general education peers in activities such as classroom discussion, writing, projects, and presentations. For the 2017-18 school year, an alignment has been made in the schedules of SWD, ENL, Honors, and Heterogeneous classes for flexible scheduling. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. I.S. 93 uses data to target ELL interventions. Classes are programmed based on this data in order to best support our ELLs. ELL teachers co-plan and co-teach with content teachers. Students receive small group and guided instruction and use supportive resources such as books on tape, dual-language books and articles, and dictionaries according to proficiency and language needs. ENL classrooms have diverse and varied libraries which include books in various languages (e.g. Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Ukraine, Russian, Portuguese, French, Bengali etc.) Entering, Emerging and SIFE ELLS are placed in a variety of intervention programs. Wilson is provided for newcomers struggling with literacy in L1 and English. The Digital DELLTA Arts 2018-19 CEP 56  Connection Program and ELLA Arts programs focus on developing English language literacy through the arts in conjunction with the use of digital portfolios are offered to ELL classes during the day and/or on Saturdays. Five ENL classes have participated in the DELLTA ARTS program for the past three years and the program is scheduled to continue next year. This program also provides materials in Spanish. The Social studies department uses multi-media (videos, apps, digital projects) to enhance SIFE curriculum and Academic Vocabulary Toolkit with LTEs to help their language development. The social studies department also uses Historypin . Historypin reveals photos near your current location and allows you to view them layered over the modern scene in front of you . You can also explore Collections of some of the best old photos from around the world, wherever you are. This application is usually used for SWD and SIFE students. Long Tern ELLS also receive vocabulary instruction through teachers trained in the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit program. Technology based interventions for ELLs, and specifically SIFE and Long Term ELLs, include Castle Learning, MyOn digital library, Achieve3000, English 3D. Duolingo is a program that uses the target language and the native language in order to help in language acquisition. These languages include Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Albanian, Serbian, Polish, Ukrainian etc. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At I.S. 93 we are hoping to grow our technology resources and bilingual resources to allow every student equal entry points to the content material. One class of dual language/ICT (Spanish) will begin in grade six for the upcoming school year. We noticed that students need to be surrounded by proficient speakers in order to acquire a new language. For this reason, we have aligned ENL classes and honors classes to allow for peer tutoring. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program that closed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There is a Title III Program which provides ENL instruction to ELLs before school from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and after school from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., two to three times a week. Students have the option of attending the morning and/or afternoon sessions. There is one teacher who teaches the morning session, and multiple teachers teach their own section in the afternoons. Instruction focuses on literacy development, academic language, and content area skills through ENL strategies and methodologies. Students develop oral reading proficiency and listening skills through the use of Achieve3000, Castle Learning, 3D English and Duolingo. Students receive native language support through the use of native language libraries and native language independent reading books. Each student has access to books in their native language (to the extent possible). The instruction focuses on language fluency, cultural recognition, and use of technology to attain fluency. Teachers also prepare students for the NYSESLAT by providing instruction on essay writing and close reading. In addition, students use audio books, online language programs, and leveled libraries. This year we also have piloted a program called ST Math once a week during classroom instruction, and in the afterschool sessions . We will continue to use the program in the next school year. The DELLTA ARTS Connection program and ELLA Arts program are other supplemental programs that we provide ELLs during schools hours and on Saturday. This program provides an alternative pathway for accessing and acquiring English language proficiency. Budget permitting, there are a.m. and p.m intervention programs in ELA and Math for all students including the ELLs. Teachers of ELLs contact students' homes if they do not return their permission slips for the programs and ensure greater attendance rates. Our guidance counselors also meet to encourage participation in various programs. ELL students are invited to participate in all clubs and sports events offered to the rest of our school population. ELLs have participated in soccer, basketball and dance clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include technology, assessment tools, literature, and supplies. All ELLs have daily access to computers/ipads and Smartboards, as well as, literacy programs such as Castle Learning, Duolingo and ST Math. The ENL department has 200 IPADs purchased through different grants and Title III program. The upcoming dual language program grant will partially pay for chromebooks as well. Over the years we have been able to purchase apps that include: science and Social Studies visual resources, recording and listening, read aloud texts, written and verbal translation, and narratation. Headphones are also readily accessible for all ELLs. These resources are mainly used with SIFE, entering, emerging and SWD/ELL. Lont-term ELLs and Former ELLs have dictionaries and translation glossaries readily accessible, as well 2018-19 CEP 57  as, ipads with multiple apps that facilitate content and language acquisition. All ELA/ ENL classrooms contain ELL libraries that include leveled, age appropriate books, audiobooks and independent reading books in English and most native languages (Arabic, Spanish, Polish, Albanian, Chinese). ELLS also use the IPADs to record their academic conversations. This especially happens during the DELLTA Dance program. Students then upload their videos onto the Explain Everything App to analyze their conversations. This is all part of a portfolio project that students complete throughout the year for the DELLTA Dance program. Newcomers and SIFE students use programs such as Duolingo, Castle Learning, Grammar Workbooks, Explain Everything. Long Term ELLs use programs such as English 3D, Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Castle Learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program model, native language libraries, dictionaries, and glossaries are available as well as technology apps in native languages are used to support instruction. Teachers use resources in the student's native language for emergent readers and when available textbooks in other languages. Teachers of ELLs are literate in other languages and provide translations and on-demand support for students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Classroom libraries are age and grade appropriate and leveled by literacy needs. Content curriculum maps are modified based on the units found on Engage New York. ENL teachers collaborate with content teachers in order to make appropriate modifications for ELLs. All units are aligned to the NYS Learning Standards. Each unit is different from the previous unit and addresses a new set of skills. Teachers use ENL strategies to scaffold instruction and promote academic language use. Services and resources are adapted for ELLs using differentiation and/or scaffolds. (i.e., graphic organizers, manipulatives, visuals, paragraph frames, technology, IPAD apps, etc.). Translated versions of tests are also provided to the extent possible. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are not a co-location school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Each newly enrolled student and parent have a causal meeting with our Parent Coordinator, Mildred Reyes, the ENL Coordinator, Dominika McPartland and a school counselor (designated by each grade) to highlight special programs at I.S. 93 to help direct the families to academic support services such as Title III programs and existing support services (e.g., Beacon, DELLTA Arts or Arts Connection). Each May, all of our feeder schools visit I.S. 93 for Middle School Orientation. At this orientation, students and parents are introduced to our staff (Principal, grade AP, dean, guidance counselor, Parent Coordinator and chosen students). Prior to the orientation, an articulation team visits all feeder schools and gathers information on all students (including ELLs) prior to their entering so we can prepare ourselves on how to better assist them when they enter I.S. 93. Articulation forms provide extensive information regarding students' social, behavioral and academic needs. Our school also invites elementary students to participate in a summer program with our middle school students at the summer school site. In order to support the ELLs transition from middle school to high school, the guidance department offers High School Open Houses, Applications help sessions (in Spanish, Polish, Chinese) during which bilingual staff assists students and their parents in filling out high school applications. Inter-school visitations, information meetings, and small group counseling is offered by our guidance counselors. Small group counseling consists of 4-6 students and focus on the high school application process. Once a semester, guidance counselors also speak with ELL classes regarding high schools and guide students through the process. For the past four years, our sixth graders have been assigned to a separate wing of the building and provided with a separate lunch period to allow for smoother transitions into the higher grades. A Parent Orientation meeting is also held in early September for parents to come and learn more about I.S. 93 and to meet our teachers and staff. ELLs who enroll throughout the school year are always informed about school rules and regulations in their language via a translator. They are also assigned a "buddy" from the same class that speaks the same language so they can travel together and get familiar with the building and the individual classroom procedures. 2018-19 CEP 58  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the current time, 7th and 8th Grade ELLs are offered 2-3 periods a week of Foreign Language (Spanish or Italian) instruction. For the 2017-2018 school year, grade 8 students will be given five periods per week of Spanish or Italian. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Dual Language Model is “side-by-side” . They are integrated 100% of the time.b. English and Spanish c. For every other week, subjects are taught in English, in different classrooms. For the other week, subjects are taught in Spanish. In the same classroom. d. Both languages are taught simultaneously. One week in one language and the other week the other language Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL department designs, plans and delivers on-going professional development throughout the year. This PD is delivered monthly in the school calendar designated as Professional Development. Throughout the school year, teachers of ELLs receive coaching in scaffolding strategies, teaching ELLs in the content areas, accountable talk, and building literacy and academic language. Teachers also have opportunities to participate in inter-classroom visitations to develop teaching skills. Monthly meetings to support ELLs will continue and include inquiry team meetings to discuss data, AIT meetings, professional books studies, and workshops on topics such as unpacking the NYSESLAT and maximizing the use of ELL resources. The PD plan for 2017-2018 is as follows: September: NYSESLAT and ELL data analysis - getting to know our ELL population October: Advocating for ELLs - ENL teacher roles November: SIOP model strategies December: Building Academic Vocabulary January: Cross curricular vocabulary connections February: ELL Assessment March: NYSESLAT overview April: Discussion techniques for ELLs May: Peer editing techniques for ELLs June: Analyzing ELL Data collected throughout the year 2018-2019 - TBD All teachers of ELLs are invited and encouraged to attend off–site PD sessions offered by the DELLSS. five of our ENL teachers attend DELLTA PDs throughout the year. Teachers who attend various PDs turnkey what they have learned during team meetings and common planning sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 59  I.S. 93 trains all staff to support ELLs. The ENL department prepares four professional developments geared toward content teachers for ELLs. These professional learning sessions are shared during our designated PL time (Monday afternoons 2:20 - 3:40 p.m.). Content teachers are also invited to participate in many content geared sessions offered by the Office of ELLs and online Colleges (i.e., Standford University). They are also invited to all on-site meetings including training on using Achieve3000, ELL data training, SIFE video screenings and unpacking the NYSESLAT. Content teachers of ELLs are invited to participate in professional book studies using ELL related professional books. This year’s books include: Advocating for ELLs by Staeher Fenner and Making Content Comprehensible for Second Language Learners by Echevarria. They are also invited to professional development sessions offered by our ENL Department Coordinator. All content teachers are also encouraged to attend courses in colleges which offer ENL or Bilingual extensions. Currently three of our content teachers have completed such extensions. Teachers forward attendance confirmation emails or certificates of attendance to the ELL Coordinator and payroll secretary who keep the record of the attendance. The ELL coordinator also keeps a record in an ELL PD binder in the ELL office. To the extent possible, at the end of the year, the ELL department organizes a Professional Learning Day where all teachers who attended workshops turnkey the most important findings to their colleagues. The DELLTA program provides 4 days of Professional Learning during the year for the five participating ENL teachers where teachers collaborate with artists and plan the digital and language component of the classes. The ELLA program provides Saturday PDs for our participating teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers will individually meet with parents of ELLs during designated parent engagement time (offered every Tuesday after school). These meetings focus on discussing student language goals, student's language development and progress and language proficiency assessments results. Such meetings are conducted with the use of interpreter if needed/requested. Records of the meetings are retained by the teacher. Teachers are responsible for keeping a log of all the meetings, phone calls,, and letters they send to ELL parents. Meeting logs include the minutes from the parent meetings and the teacher's anecdotal records of the meetings. Teachers share the information with their grade teams. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator conducts monthly meetings and/or workshops, providing translation when needed. ESL and computer classes are offered to parents at various times throughout the year. Targeted audience workshops for parents of students with disabilities and ELLs regarding the Common Core Learning Standards are offered. The School Leadership Team meets monthly. Members inform parents of CEP initiatives and activities. The school's Principal conducts quarterly meetings with the PTA executive board and meets monthly with the Title I Parent Involvement Committee to discuss recommendations for how to use Title I Parent Involvement Funds. I.S.93 now holds an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs and offers all parents the chance to participate on the Title I Parent Involvement Committee, which recommends to the SLT ways to use Title I funds (1% Set Aside) to promote parent involvement including parents of ELLs. Years prior, translation equipment has been purchased using Title I funds (1% Set Aside) for meetings and translators are contracted as needed through Legal Interpretation Services. Pupil Path training is also provided on a one to one basis when requested (through our Parent Coordinator). Monthly PTA meetings encourage parent participation in school events (i.e. fund raising, chaperoning school dances, etc.). Notices are sent out and available on our school's website in multiple languages (Spanish, Arabic, Polish). Specifically, our ELLs and Foreign Language departments host an international food festival /parent night at the end of the school year. This event invites all parents of ELLs to join our school staff in a night that celebrates the cultural diversity of the school. Additionally, parents of ELLs are invited to the annual city-wide ELL conference. 2018-19 CEP 60  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Edward Santos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: I.S.93 Ridgewood School DBN: 24Q093 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Edward Santos Title Principal Catherine Fratangelo Assistant Principal Mildred Reyes Parent Coordinator Lauren Pizzolla ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lillian Esposito Parent Sharifa Cadogan Teacher/Subject Area Richard Cardino Teacher/Subject Area Gloria Serna N/A Coach Coach Debby Hartz School Counselor Madelene Chan Yazmin Torres N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Giuvela Leisengang Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 N/A 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q093 School Name: Ridgewood Intermediate School 93 Superintendent: M. Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school uses several sources of data. We use the ATS Home Language reports RHLA and RPOB, feedback from parents (obtained via email or oral discussion at PTA, SLT or face to face meetings), as well as data obtained from parent surveys and HLIS. The Principal, Parent Coordinator and Pupil Accounting Secretary review the Home Language Report from ATS (RHLA) and Emergency Contact cards( Blue Cards) to determine the languages spoken by the families of our general education students.For new admits to the school, the pupil accounting secretary and the ESL coordinator survey the parents during registration and periodically review HLIS to determine translation needs. Our Parent Coordinator is our point person for making arrangements for translations for Parent Information Night, PTC, Parent/Student award ceremonies and for School Assemblies that are held after regular school hours. 2018-19 CEP 64  A letter was sent home via backpack (in Spanish, English, Arabic, Polish, Romanian, Sign and Serbian) asking parents if they need language translation during Parent Teacher Conferences. Over 100 requested Spanish, two requested Chinese, two requested Arabic and one requested Tibetan. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language It was determined that thirty seven different languages are spoken by students of I.S. 93 and their families. 46% percent speak Spanish, four percent speak Arabic, five percent speak Chinese, and three percent speak Polish. Along with this data, the team also looked at the “softer” data from our surveys concerning the parents’ perceptions of how I.S. 93 communicates with them regarding their children. These two forms guided our initiatives to support translation services. It was determined that several areas of translation were needed. It was determined that oral translation services were needed when incidents occur that require parents to come to school to discuss academic or discipline issues. It was also determined that parents wanted translations of documents that get sent home in the book bags of students with announcements and memos concerning a variety of topics from the school such as parent conferences, PA meetings, monthly newsletters, etc. 2018-19 CEP 65  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We typically distribute translated verions of the following documents: Monthly newsletters - translated in English and Spanish (available the 1 st of every month) via email, backpack and posted on school's webpage (copies also available in the general office on display for visitors Monthly calendars - updated as events come up via school's website (IS93.org) - events also listed on monthly newsletter and sent via email to all parents that sign-up for email notification Parent-Teacher conference announcements - via email in Spanish, English, Polish, Chinese and Arabic approximately two weeks prior Progress Reports - on-going connection with families are sent home quarterly via backpack (Skedula.com) Permission slips for after school activities and trips are available in English and Spanish (*other languages as needed) 2018-19 CEP 66  New York State testing calendar available on our school website, School Bulletin Board, displayed in the main office and reminders sent home via phone blasts Parent workshop announcements are sent home in English and Spanish via backpacks, email, newsletter, webpage and phone blast 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? ESL parents orientation - September Welcome/Curriculum Open school night - September High School Information night - October PTC 1 - November PTC 2 - March Parents night - May Parent engagement time - everyTuesday - 35 minutes 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school provides a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights to each parent, whose primary language is a covered language. Extra copies of the translations can be found in our Parent Coordinator’s and guidance offices suites. A welcome sign in each of the covered languages is posted on the Parent Coordinator’s bulletin board in the lobby of the school. A translation of the posting requirements of this section of the Chancellor’s Regulation regarding this topic, is also posted on the bulletin board. The School Safety Plan contains a provision and a procedure for parents in need of language assistance to be able to communicate with the administrative offices. Also, our school's Parent Coordinator informs parents of translation options on the school's website. The teachers are also made aware that all the notification documents can be found at the T&I Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? For the first time, parents were invited to "Breakfast with the Principal. " Topics of discussion include: feeling welcome, what they would like to see, and workshop ideas. A "Reflection Sheet" is available in the main office and given to all parents to complete before they exit the building regarding the service provided to them. Parents will now be invited to complete a reflectionsheet after meeting with guidance counselors, Assistant Principals, the Principal, and deans. As well, parents will be asked to complete a reflection sheet after PTA meetings, Parent Engagement events, and IEP meetings. Parent Surveys are given during the spring Parent Teacher conferences. Several questions specifically address how the school communicates with parents and their satisfaction with the provided services. 2018-19 CEP 68 
