2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q097 School Name: P.S. 097 FOREST PARK Principal: MARILYN CUSTODIO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 97Q / The Forest Park School 27Q097 322700010097 Pre-K -Five School Number (DBN): 85-52 85th Street Woodhaven, New York 11421 718-849-4870 Phone Number: 718-849-5356 Fax: Stella Kalogridis skalogr@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Marilyn Custodio Lisa DelValle Eva Drew Mindy Scalzetti Isabel Vargas N/A N/A District Information JenniferAmbert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard jambert@schools. nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Community School District 27 FSC: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBoulevard Room 201B Ozone Park, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-718-348-2958 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Marilyn Custodio Lisa DelValle Eva Drew N/A Isabel Vargas N/A N/A N/A MelissaBernacett Bridget Bass JessicaFeria Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Christina Kabbadias KandyAlva Mindy Scalzetti Isabel Vargas Kendra Kuzai EddyRodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Staff Member/Parent Member/Staff Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Forest Park School is a diverse school that strives to work together to provide opportunities for students to achieve success and prepare them for College and Careers. At P.S. 97, The Forest Park School community we prepare our students for college and career by embracing their strengths and providing them with a quality education in which they are challenged to reach their maximum potential both academically and personally through instruction that is differentiated for all learners.On a day to day basis, all staff works together by meeting in grade teams to enhance 2018-19 CEP 9  student learning with multiple learning strategies. With the idea that all students learn differently and at different paces, teachers prepare daily lessons with multiple entry points. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Across all classrooms at P.S.97, the school’s common core aligned curricula and integrated instructional shifts encourage rigorous habits and higher order thinking skills to meet the needs of all learners. We are currently using Common Core aligned curriculum for literacy and mathematics (Ready Gen and Go Math!) and assessments ( i-Ready, school net baseline and benchmarks). The school continues to place a strong focus on literacy and math, and all classes have a wide range of leveled text to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers engage students in literacy lessons that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, the balanced literacy model, with attention given to guided reading and close reading. Across the school there is an ongoing focus on writing and informational texts. This year we continue to be a part of the Teacher's College Writing Project. In addition we have departmentalized our grade five classes and introduced them to Algebra for All. We are also a Sep Jr. school which enables our students to take part in computer science classes. Teacher teams work collaboratively to make the necessary adjustments to unit plans and performance tasks, such as embedding academic vocabulary, thus ensuring college and career readiness and the school’s integration of a Common Core curriculum that is rigorous and engaging for all learners. School leaders utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching and engages in targeted pedagogical support to improve student outcomes. School leaders use the observation of classroom practice to ensure instruction is aligned with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Through the use of low inference observations, teachers engage in effective conversations with administrators and colleagues, regarding their strengths, areas for instructional improvement and targeted next steps. Staff professional development is differentiated and derived from the school’s goals, observations of teacher practice, identified areas of need and teacher’s choice. The school’s consistency and frequency of classroom observation practice, and focused conversations with teachers result in the improvement of pedagogical practice and student performance. The Forest Park School has an excellent tone and climate where all students are well respected and welcomed. In alignment with the Citywide Instructional Expectations, systems and structures have been set in place to ensure that each student in the school is known well by at least one staff member. All teachers are able to articulate individual student’s development, both academically and socially, through the use of ongoing assessments and teacher-student conferences. The guidance counselor and the parent coordinator provide exemplary support for parents, including parents of English language learners, and students with disabilities by offering them ongoing professional development in the Common Core Learning Standards in both English and Spanish. One of our ENL teachers provided parents of English Language Learners with a series of parent workshops to teach parents the skills necessary to help their child succeed both academically and socially. There are clear and established attendance procedures to ensure that student attendance continues to improve. Attendance is also celebrated through school wide and class initiatives. Over the past year, The Forest Park School has taken steps to increase the rigor of instruction across all grades. Instruction is customized to meet individual students’ needs, motivating and fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers set high expectations for all their students through goal setting, progress monitoring, and individual conferences. Students play an active role in their learning. Teachers embed student choice, self-assessment and peer assessment into their daily lessons. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our instructional focus this school year is to introduce and reinforce academic language using a common set of strategies to help our students acquire and use the content area knowledge taught in the classroom. Throughout the school year, teachers use student work samples, conference logs, rubrics, and exit slips, at the end of lessons to analyze students’ work and provide them with feedback. There are literacy mid-unit checkpoints, assessments, and end of unit performances tasks in literacy, as well as Go Math! performance tasks that are aligned to CCLS in order to gauge student understanding. Collaborative practices among teachers is very evident. Each grade has two common preps in order to meet to improve instruction and discuss student data and outcomes as well as plan next steps for differentiated instruction to meet the needs of all learners in their classroom. Teachers also meet during the 80-minute professional learning on Mondays, in which they discuss ways to modify, customize and improve instruction. Inter-visitations are scheduled for teachers to view model lessons in Literacy and GO Math! Administration debriefs with teachers following the visit to discuss how they are going to implement the strategies they observed in their classroom. All teachers on any given grade play an active role in their teacher teams, they all have a voice in the process of evaluating and being proactive in the process. During each 6-week Professional Learning cycle, a different member of the team is chosen to be the leader for the upcoming cycle. For the upcoming school year, we will continue to focus on increasing the level of rigorous instruction in daily lessons as well as the collaborative practices among teachers across all grade levels. We will also focus on strengthening family and community ties. We will work to increase the number of parents that attend daily parent workshops, parent teacher conferences and open school nights. We will also continue to focus on including parents as active participants in the school community. Parents will be invited into classrooms during Open School Week to observe and take part in a lesson with their child so that they can learn how to best help their child meet their goals. In addition, students engage in "Student led Conferences" with their parents on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement time. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our ELL student population is large and we are always striving to meet their needs through customized differentiated learning tasks. There are 157 ELL students which is 21.84% of our register. There is also 114 Special Education students making up 15.86% of the population. Students with IEP's are either in a self contained class, Integrated Co teaching class or have related services to support their specific needs. ELL students are supported with a push in or pull out service that is directed towards their specific needs as well. Teachers of students with IEP's teach around the students specific goals and individual needs stated in their IEP. Our ELL teachers strongly focus on vocabulary as well as reading and writing skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made progress in having our teachers collaborate and share ideas with each other as well as a willingness to have their colleagues inter-visit their classroom to view best practices in action. This year we will focus on ensuring academic language is introduced and reinforced using a common set of strategies to help our students acquire and use the content area knowledge taught in the classroom. Our staff is familiar with the 3 levels of academic language, and will pursue strategies to assist in teaching Tier I, Tier II and Tier III words. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q097 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 720 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 16 31 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 81.9% % Reduced Lunch 23.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 72.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.06 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 73 73 31 93.8% 6.0% 16.5% 2.2% 17.8% 2.1% 4 0% 7.9 50.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-2018 written feedback shared from the Principal Performance observation visit indicated that as a school we make strategic organizational decisions which is essential to the growth of our school community. We have established a variety of ways to support the individual needs of students through a series of morning programs. For example, NYSESLAT data is utilized to create class assignments for students in order for appropriate supports to be provided. We are currently participating in city-wide initiatives such as Algebra for All and Computer Science for All which required adjustments to teacher assignments and school programming. We provide our teachers with opportunities to meet in structured collaborations during common preparation periods that were built into the program as well as on Monday during professional learning. We were the recipient of the SEP Junior Grant, which is supporting out Computer Science program as students are provided with the tools and resources to to code and support our Lego Robotics program. At P.S. 97, The Forest Park School, we strive to create a culture of mutual respect and positive attitudes which in turn promotes positive academic and personal behaviors. We have established a culture conducive to student and adult learning, where members of the community treat each other with respect. Our students are able to articulate an adult in the building they can speak with for guidance and support if it were necessary. We have established a system to monitor student attendance during monthly attendance meetings and provide PBIS training for teachers to support a positive school culture. We have established a set of goals aimed at improving in each element of the Framework for Great Schools. Our School Leadership and Instructional Teams worked collaboratively to analyze school data and develop goals focused on improvement in teaching practices and student outcomes. We track our data from ADVANCE, Fountas and Pinnell and Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) in order to monitor the progress and to support improved learning outcomes. As a school, we have established structures that promote distributive leadership and professional collaborations which supports the growth of teacher practice and student outcomes. Teacher teams meet and review student work samples using a "Strength and Gap Protocol" to determine next steps for students. Teachers identify student work in high, middle and low categories to determine gaps in performance across each level. Distributive leadership structures are in place as our teachers facilitate team meetings and make decisions regarding future practices. As the 2018-19 CEP 13  team continues their work, we will continue to encourage then to did deeper into the root causes of the gaps; Why are students struggling to respond to extended response questions? As a school, we must continue to deepen school-wide instructional practices through the strategic facilitation of professional learning and feedback to that teachers implement tasks with strategic scaffolds and supports in order for all learners to engage in appropriately challenging tasks that promote high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 51% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions. Also, 46% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. As the assessments become more difficult, students need to become more confident and challenge themselves. Our teachers must also continue to hone their craft in order to push the children to their full potential by improving their own practice of questioning and discussion techniques within their classrooms. In addition, as a school we will continue to deepen our school based assessment practices to ensure that collected data provides staff with the ability to provide actionable and meaningful feedback to students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, teachers will incorporate effective higher order thinking questions to promote student thinking and discussion into daily instruction as measured by a 5% increase in highly effective teacher ratings in Danielson 3b, Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will use higher order questioning and discussion techniques to engage students through the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) matrix. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Grade Level Teams, Administrators During class discussions, students will be provided with the necessary supports to build upon each others ideas in order to enrich their contributions to discussions, writing and problem solving. Students with disabilities, English language learners and other high-need subgroups will be provided with small group, customized questions for each lesson as well as a list of discussion starters to assist them in contributing to class discussions with their peers. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Students with disabilities, English language learners and other high-need subgroups Teachers that are effective in questioning with inter-visit their colleagues who are highly effective in order to gain insight into questioning and discussion practices that can be utilized in their own classroom. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with workshops on how they can help their children think on a higher level through asking them specific questions to boost their thought processes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Depth of Knowledge (DOK) wheel, discussion starters, inter-visitation schedule. This will be incorporated into during Monday Professional Learning. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, on-going progress will be monitored by administrators through their short frequent observations, looking at student work, and lesson plans as measured by Danielson's Framework for Teaching as evidenced in an increase in effective and highly effective teachers in domain 3d in Advance. In addition, inter-visitations will be arranged according to need and subgroups. For example, special education teachers will inter-visit special education classrooms in order to view best practices in domain 3d. Teacher's will be provided with a feedback form in order for them to indicate how they will apply the strategies observed in their classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, on-going progress will be monitored by administrators through their short frequent observations, looking at student work, and lesson plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Assessment practices are currently in place in all classrooms, but we must continue to further strengthen the work of using assessment tools and rubrics across classrooms to provide actionable and meaningful feedback to ensure all students are aware of their next learning steps. This will be done in an environment which is supportive to students as they continue to re-visit their work and assess their ongoing progress. We must have our students assess their own work as well as peer assess. According to our 2017-18 School Quality Guide, Under Supportive Environment, 59% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives direction. In addition to 61% of teachers say that students pay attention when they are supposed to. We will continue to work on encouraging students to become active listeners. By having students listen carefully, they will be able to better understand teacher's feedback and put it into practice as they are assessing their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, all teachers including out of classroom teachers will continue to fully integrate assessment in instruction to address individual and student subgroup needs as measured by Danielson's Framework for Teaching as evidenced in a 5% increase in effective and highly effective teachers in Domain 3d "Using Assessment in Instruction" in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Groups of teachers will participate in ongoing professional development in the effective implementation of assessment practices and practices to promote student self-assessment and peer assessment. Teachers will use Danielson’s Framework for teaching as a guide when planning instruction and daily assessment (Teachers will engage in inter-visitations to observe effective and highly effective assessment practices in other classrooms. All students will be included in the creation of child friendly assessment rubrics and will engage in self and peer assessments. Students will set individual goals based on needs determined through their self and peer assessments. Students will disabilities, ELL and other high need subgroups will be provided with small group, customized instruction in self-assessment and goal setting practices such as using child-friendly checklists and discussing strengths and weaknesses Families will be invited to participate in workshops in order to gain an understanding of student self-assessment practices and individual goal setting. Families will be invited to observe and interact with their child during a classroom lesson during open school week. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers, Students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Administration Families, Teachers, Students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Homework help, math, reading and test readiness strategies to assist parents in supporting their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  Depth of Knowledge (DOK), lesson specific child- friendly assessment checklists, student self-assessments and exit slips will be utilized. Teachers will use professional learning time to build on their knowledge and pedagogical practices to support student growth. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will analyze their assessment notes weekly and plan next steps for instruction based on their notes. Students will be placed in flexible groups based on the teacher’s review of assessment notes as well as through the review of student’s self-assessments. There will be evidence that the students have helped establish the evaluation criteria. By February 2019, on-going progress will be monitored by administrators through ongoing discussions with teachers. Teachers will provide evidence to prove that the students are effectively utilizing student friendly rubrics and specific feedback in their daily work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, on-going progress will be monitored by administrators through their short frequent observations, looking at student work, and lesson plans as measured by Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and evidenced in a 2% increase of effective and highly effective teachers in domain 3d in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s Instructional Team works collaboratively to assess both instructional and achievement gaps. As a team, members have used student data; both formative and summative to determine specific needs and standards to be addressed. Teacher leaders meet with grade level teams to use the data in a continuous improvement process. Data includes, but is not limited to Literacy and Go Math! unit benchmarks, i-Ready diagnostic reports, MOSL NYC Baseline Performance Tasks, Fountas and Pinnell running records, NYS Item analysis and CCLS aligned baselines and benchmarks. ADVANCE feedback and teacher reports from 2017-2018 indicate some need of the areas for improvement in Engaging Students in Learning (3c) and Designing Coherent Instruction (1e). We developed our instructional focus based on those needs: Instructional Focus: To introduce and reinforce academic language using a common set of strategies to help our students acquire and use the content area knowledge taught in the classroom. According to feedback received from the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review, there was a need to continue to deepen school-wide instructional practices through the strategic facilitation of professional learning and feedback in order for teachers to implement tasks with strategic scaffolds and supports so that all learners engage in appropriately challenging tasks that promote high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion through teacher collaboration. According to the School Environment Survey Report 2017-2018, 80% of the teachers agree with this statement " Teachers have opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development . Teacher teams have been working in cycles and will determine the content and length of their professional learning. They will select which professional development presentations they would like to attend based on their own needs. Teachers will share their expertise with their colleagues. As per the NYC School Survey, data indicates that Quality of Professional Development is the highest need for this framework element. For example, as per the 2018 NYC School Survey, 34% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Through teacher collaboration as well as intra- collaborations, teachers review best practices associated with the analysis of student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 20  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade level/content specific teacher teams as well as the Instructional Team will meet monthly to analyze student work through inquiry, as evidenced by a 3% increase in the ELA MOSL from the baseline to the end of the year assessment. 2018-19 CEP 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Team Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To understand the needs and incorporate trust a committee of teacher leaders will work together to create a Professional Learning Community throughout the school. The committee / team will meet monthly to review new protocols for effective teacher teams, share progress and concerns. Team leaders will collaborate with grade level/content area teams to determine the agenda for each team meeting as part of a cycle plan and add plans to a shared planning document. Team leaders will change with each new cycle increasing teacher capacity in the building. Teams will determine the focus of each cycle, common formative assessments and resources necessary for the team. During this time, teachers will be sure to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Langauge Learners and other high-need student subgroups. Teachers will use Parent Engagement time to meet with parents and discuss student's academic progress and steps being taken in order to help them meet grade level standards. Teachers, Parents Common Planning Time- To understand and incorporate trust, teachers are provided with common planning time built into the master schedule. Grades have two common preps a week. All Grade Level Teachers, ENL Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parents Grade Leaders , Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Review of MOSL rubrics from the beginning of the year compared to the end of the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22   Curriculum Summer Professional Development Sessions  Professional Development Ready Gen and Go Math Curriculum During the School Year  Smart Science Professional Development  i-Ready Training Sessions  Master Schedule- 2 Common PREPS per grade/content area  Teacher Development Coach-Grade Four Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher Leaders will use a Teacher Leader Competency Rubric to self-assess at the end of each Professional Learning Cycle Grade Level/Content Area Teams will use a Team Behavior Self- assessment rubric to assess their progress at the end of each learning cycle. Common formative assessments will be developed and used during each cycle to check the progress of student learning after instructional strategies that have been developed during the cycle have been implemented. Teacher will administer a beginning, middle and end of the year benchmark assessment in ELA and Math. Results will be analyzed and next steps will be planned and implemented based on the results. In order to assess midway through the school year, iReady Diagnostics will be used during the months of January and February to assess the progress toward out annual goals. By February 2019, teachers will analyze data, as evidenced by a 3% increase in the ELA beginning of the year iReady Diagnostic, to the midway iReady assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February, 2019 on going progress will be measured through the use of a mid-year assessment to show a 3% increase in ELLS and SWD performance on the ELA iReady Diagnostic results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Inquiry Work will enable us to dig deeper into improving the writing of our students-identifying the strengths, improve the weakness of describing story elements, analyzing texts, making statements and giving supporting details and be able to provide constructive feedback\next steps. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 66% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaborate to align the writing curriculum in order for 80% of student's in grades three-five will make progress on written analysis of writing in each genre (narrative, informational, opinion) utilizing the workshop model, conferring and small group instruction as well as using the Teacher's College Writing Pathways rubrics to assess student writing. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs   Teachers in K-5 will collaborate on the grade to design Teachers CCLS aligned writing lessons using the TC Writing Units of Study.  Teachers will collaborate across the grades in order to align writing curriculum and writing rubrics with the support of the TC staff developers. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrators September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrators Strategies to Address SWD's and ENL's   Teacher's will assist student (including SWDs and ENLs) in Teachers identifying and establishing clear learning goals to improve their reading comprehension of both fiction and non-fiction text. Support staff (SETSS teacher and ENL teachers) will provide both push-in and pull-out services in order to support the needs of SWDs and ENLs.   Meet monthly with PPT and Inquiry Teams to ensure that students with IEP's and/or special needs are receiving the services needed to succeed and show growth.  Teachers will model close reading, analyzing informational texts, and higher order questioning and discussion techniques. Students will demonstrate higher order thinking and comprehension through their informational writing. Parents, Teachers, September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Engaging Families  Teachers will reach out to parents of ESL, SWD and struggling students to inform them of their child's progress and work together to promote academic success.  TC workshops presented by teachers to the parents to help them learn about our work with the TC writing program.  Display Boards throughout the building will have monthly student work in all grades updated every unit 2018-19 CEP 25 alongside the writing pathways rubrics that serve as examples of expectations of how students should be writing in every grade. Professional Learning and Trust Teachers  Lead teachers, ENL and special education liaisons will provide professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals in order to share strategies and best practices that can be used to improve student comprehension.  Teachers College (TC) Staff Developers will provide 20 days of professional development, split between grade K-2 and 3-5. Lab site teachers and administrators will participate in professional development days at TC.  September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At P.S. 97, parent engagement is a top priority. We strive to make every attempt to have our families involved. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 95% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. Teachers use class DoJo to communicate daily, as well as our school website that is updated regularly. Our School Leadership Team meets monthly, to discuss strategies to promote parent leadership as well as how to help their children at home. Our classroom teachers also volunteer their time to do family workshops for parents, which involve learning new skills and strategies to use within their children at home, as well as free resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources : Lab site in every grade   10 Day(s) 3-5 TC Staff Developer   80 Minute Professional Development time. Special Education and ENL Liaisons Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will collaborate to align the writing curriculum so that 40% of students in grades 3-5 will make progress of at least 1 writing level on written analysis of writing in each genre (narrative, informational, opinion) that was taught with a pre and post on demand writing utilizing the Teachers College Writing Project writing pathways rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Performance based assessment (on-demand writing). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates that 90% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. Since family and parent engagement are so important to the education of each child, we will focus on increasing that statistic to get more families involved in their child’s education. In addition, as well as keeping up to date on student’s performance, parents will be provided with workshops on how to help their children strive to reach their full academic potential in order for them to be college and career ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase of parents participating in regularly scheduled parent and school meetings as well as Student Led Conferences held throughout the school year as measured by attendance forms. 2018-19 CEP 28 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/ Guardians September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in grades Pre-K through 5 Parents/ Guardians September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades Pre-K through 5 Teachers and Parents of all students Pre-K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, All Pedagogical Staff, Parent Coordinator Teachers and Parents of all students Pre-K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, All Pedagogical Staff, Parent Coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent outreach sessions will be conducted by teachers on Tuesdays from September 2018 to June 2019 to effectively keep parents informed of their progress throughout the year. Students will participate in "Student Led Conferences" with their parents on Tuesdays throughout the school year where they have to opportunity to speak to their own progress. In order to incorporate trust and understand needs, parents will receive ongoing communication and progress reports to continually be informed of their child’s progress throughout the year. All parents and teachers will be invited to attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings PTA, SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, Title I Parent committee, PTA) to inform and strengthen the parent and school community connection. All parents will attend parent/teacher conferences 4 times a year. More usage of Class Dojo by teachers in order to foster communication Maintaining outreach logs, feedback from monthly parent meetings, Class Dojo and teacher and parent responses on the School Survey. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops. Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:30 p.m.-3:00 p.m. Student Led Conferences 2018-19 CEP 29  PTA meetings Title I Parent meetings Class Dojo program to foster communication between the teacher and the home Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis to communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust: To understand needs and incorporate trust, parents and teachers are encouraged to participate and attend in all scheduled parent and school meetings to increase and strengthen the school/parent connections. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community partnerships, school community, translators. Adjusting schedule of events to meet the needs of the majority of parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase of parents and teachers participating regularly scheduled parent and school meetings (Tuesday Student Led Conferences, SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, PTA) as evidenced in, attendance at meetings and workshops as well as Tuesday Parent Engagement Student Led Conference logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 30  By February, 2019 parent outreach logs, will be reviewed in order to ensure that all parents are being reached and are being provided with feedback on their child’s progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Data from student’s assessments in the area of English Language Arts is reviewed. Students are placed in RTI Tiers and the students falling into Tier 3 will be provided with morning programs to best suit the student's academic needs. Mathematics Data from student’s assessments in the area of Mathematics is reviewed. Students are placed in morning programs Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Kindergarten through grade two students who are in need of support in ELA will participate in Fundations lessons and work in small groups. Teachers in these grades develop their own customized lessons based on the needs of their students. Parent workshops designed to review and explain the Fundations program is provided for parents in order for them to be aware of the strong support given to their children which will help them meet their academic goal and how they can assist their children at home. Services are provided by teachers and the Math CITE Consultant using Go Math!, customized instruction, CCLS aligned math strategies in order to Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The method of delivery of service is small group instruction. 1:1 assistance is provided for tier 3 students as determined by class assessments in conjunction with RTIoffered within the classroom by the classroom teacher. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the school day. A Title III morning after program is provided for ELL students as well as ELL students with disabilities on Wednesdays and Thursdays for one hour. The method of delivery of service is small group instruction Services are provided during the school day. A Title III morning program is provided for ELL students as well as ELL students 2018-19 CEP 32  according to their level. Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student assessments on a variety of science based topics are analyzed. Based on the data, students in need of assistance in the area of science are provided with small group service. Student assessments on a variety of social studies based topics are analyzed. Based on the data, students in need of assistance in the area of social studies are provided with small group service. Students with counseling on their IEP’s receive their mandated counseling service. with disabilities on Wednesdays and Thursdays for one hour. The method of delivery of service is small group instruction Services are provided during the school day. The method of delivery of service is small group instruction Services are provided during the school day. raise proficiency levels. An intervention plan is developed for the upper grades using data from benchmark assessments and standardized assessments. Supplemental math programs and test prep models/strategies such as NY ready are used during the day. SETSS is utilized and focuses on hands-on problem solving. Enrichment activities are used to extend understanding and build enthusiasm. In grade four, there is an increased use of multiple strategies for expository text in order to prepare students for the upcoming science test. In grades three, four and five, during the day teachers focus on teaching students how to analyze and respond to questions utilizing several strategies to achieve success. At-Risk Guidance:Group and individual counseling on an as needed and scheduled basis. The method of delivery of service is small group instruction Services are provided during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 33  Students who are at risk will be given AIS instruction. Consultation with administration, staff and parents. Referrals to support agencies Counseling, attendance and behavior modification as well as work study skills, ACS liaison activities and conferring with parents. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As per the RATH report in ATS, we have 4 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Free school meals, door to door transportation, free school supplies and backpack. Students will be offered at risk guidance and AIS services, if needed, in order to assist them in progressing academically. We also provide STH will bus service, school supplies, free meals. Students have the opportunity to participate in before and after school activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Non-Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  Non-Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Non-Applicable 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At P.S. 97/ The Forest Park School ensures that staff members are highly qualified by having the Pupil Personnel secretary work closely with the Director of Human Resources point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. These teachers are set up with an action plan in which they are assigned to inter-visit their colleague’s classrooms to view specific lessons. Teachers then have time to de-brief with the teacher on the lesson they observed. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers meet during Professional Learning time as well as during weekly common preps to plan their lessons and align them to the CCLS. Teachers have attended workshops and turn-keyed the information to the whole staff regarding how to implement and align the standards to instruction. The teachers plan by grade level as well as look at the standards above and below their teaching grade in order to see what is expected of the students the following year. One teacher per grade level will attend training over the summer as well as throughout the school year to further develop their knowledge of the Teacher's College writing initiative that we are part of for the 2018-2019 school year. We have two Teacher's College Staff Developers that will be working with our teachers for 20 days. They have established lab sites in which they model writing lessons for teachers as well as work with the teachers in their grade level groups to provide them with support as they teach the TC writing curriculum. In addition, we have receive a Sep Jr. / Computer Science For All (CS4ALL) grant that will enable our students to expand their knowledge through a high quality computer science program that balances rigorous and meaningful direct instruction through open-ended creative computing. Our fifth grade will continue to be part of Algebra for All. Grade five teachers will be attending training over the summer as well as throughout the school year in order to gain the knowledge and strategies needed to provide their students with effective departmentalization of core subject areas.Professional development will take place on days determined by the DOE guidelines and designated Chancellor’s conference days. Professional development will be on-going every Monday for 80 minutes, teacher teams and through Network and DOE opportunities. The professional development needs of the teachers is assessed and from there, high quality customized professional development will be provided. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-K program uses the Pre-K CCLS the city provides in order to align Pre-K to the Kindergarten standards. The Pre-K teacher meets during teacher team meetings and grade conferences with the kindergarten teachers. Parents of Pre-K students are invited to CCLS workshops in order to connect Pre-K to the elementary program. The Pre-K and kindergarten teachers share records and information about the students in order to best place Pre-K students the following year. We ensure that our students begin their academic career with a strong start and emphasize the importance of early childhood education. As a school, we provide our Pre-K students including those who are at-risk with an aligned curriculum to early childhood programs in order to provide a seamless instructional transition to elementary school wide programs. Our parents are invited to attend activities to guide them through the transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are using Ready Gen and GO Math! which are aligned to the CCLS. Teachers meet in teams and discuss which assessments they will use to assess students after each unit. Teachers revise and modify their curriculum maps in Ready Gen and GO Math! throughout the school year. We provide ongoing customized professional development to all teachers in analyzing assessment data to increase teacher’s understanding of student performance with the goal being to improve instruction . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 38  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 362,592 111,821 21,454 2,145 184,708 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A Part3, 5B Part 3, 5C Part 3 5C Part 3, 5A Part 3, 5B Part 3, 5D Part 3, 5E Part 3 5A Part 3, 5E Part 3 5A Part 3, 5C Part 3, 5D Part 3, 5E Part 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 CEP 39  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 97 / The Forest Park School , in compliance with Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 97 / The Forest Park School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 97 / The Forest Park School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As measured by The School Quality Guide 2016-2017 our ELL population exceeded the targets in both English Language Arts and Mathematics according to the Closing Achievement Gap Metrics. English Language Learners in English Language Arts achieved a school value of 3.41, which is above the expected target of 2.50. Our population percentage of range in English Language Arts is 55.6%. ELLS in Mathematics achieved a school value of 3.50 which is above the expected target of 2.71. Our population percentage range in mathematics is 56.8%. To continue and increase the level of success that our ELLS have experienced, we will be improving our supplemental programs. We will continue our Title III and Immigrant programs. Our morning program, DISCOVER, will be a social studies project based program. English Language Learners in second grade through fifth grade will be grouped according to proficiency levels of up to two grade spans. Classes may contain students across two grades with the same or similar levels. Students will be grouped according to their levels from entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding as assigned through NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The program will take place three mornings a week, Tuesday through Thursday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:50 a.m. The program will begin in early November and continue through April. The DISCOVER program will include three English New Language teachers and five general/special education teachers depending on the number of students attending. Teachers will receive training in different strategies to develop academic vocabulary and build speaking, writing and reading skills. Teachers will work with students to build their academic language and provide background knowledge that the students need for success in their daily classroom instruction. The students will be instructed through read alouds, shared reading and guided reading lessons focusing on skills and strategies for both decoding and comprehension. Lessons will include front loaded vocabulary, visuals and graphic organizers and various entry points to engage students in the social studies content. Materials will include trade books and guided reading books that are high interest and relate to the social studies concepts. Students will create hands on projects based on the content from the New York City social studies scope and sequence. Materials for this program will be purchased through Title III funding. Teachers will use various websites and technology to enhance the curriculum and content. Teachers will work together to bridge the gap for students by bringing the key concepts to life in an exciting way. Entering ELL students and immigrant students will also be invited to our Saturday Global Learning Academy which includes science, mathematics and computer science. Our Saturday Global Learning Academy will be an eight week program running from mid January through March for three hours (8:15 a.m. - 11:15 a.m.). All immigrant students will be invited, many of which include English Language Learners. Students will be grouped by grade and two ENL teachers will push into different grades to service children and support the classroom lessons. The program includes ten teachers: two ENL teachers, six general/special education teachers, two science teachers and one computer science teacher depending on the number of students attending. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Teachers will receive training in different strategies to develop academic vocabulary and build speaking, writing and reading skills. In addition, students will work on math problem solving skills using real world math problems. The students will also be instructed through guided reading lessons focusing on skills and strategies for both decoding and comprehension. Lessons will include front loaded vocabulary, visuals, graphic organizers and will include multiple entry points to engage students. Materials will include trade books and guided reading books that are of high interest and relate to the science concepts. Technology will also be integrated into the program through the use of Smart Boards, laptops and i Pads which will be used during instruction and computer science. Other materials will include math manipulatives, literacy and mathematics support materials. Supplementary materials will be purchased with Title III funds and used exclusively during the Title III program. The instructional goal of this program is to provide extra time and support and engage ELLs through multiple entry points including technology. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development plan for all English New Language teachers at PS97Q The Forest Park School is ongoing. Such professional development includes: new teacher training, Title III funding, initial enrollment procedures, inquiry data and analysis, preparation and scoring for NYSESLAT, i Ready, mathematics problem solving techniques through Algebra for All, Teq webinars, Heinemann guided reading, and Teachers College Writer's Workshop. ENL teachers also attend Queens South Field Support Center trainings such as MLDI, EILI, Nuts and Bolts, ACE, and EDAT. The professional development plan for ENL personnel is current and maintained every year. Teachers are encouraged to attend workshops to learn additional strategies and stay informed of current trends. Participants of these ongoing workshops include subject area teachers, special education providers, service providers, paraprofessionals, school secretaries, and the parent coordinator. Ongoing professional development will be implemented for all staff. Strategies and analysis of the ENL program will be shared with all classroom teachers. We provide in-service training to all staff in order to deliver appropriate instructional and support services. The ENL teachers provide staff with strategies for use in the classroom to develop language and literacy skills for our ENL student population. The plan for facilitating professional development among classroom and content area teachers is to support ELLs this includes ENL instructional moves to support academic language. Professional development takes place on designated Chancellor's Staff Development days in September, November, and June. Professional development is also provided during the designated time on Mondays during professional learning as well as afterschool pending funding. To support ELLs and former ELLs, SIFE, long-term ELLs and ELLs with IEPs, ENL teachers attend monthly professional development from September to June offered by the Queens South Field Support Center. At the culminating meeting (ELL Summit), ENL teachers and administrators share presentations of best practices, challenges and successes. After ENL teachers attend these workshops, they share instructional moves with the staff over a series of 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development professional development workshops. Additionally, information from ACE workshops offered by the Queens South FSC is shared by administration to ENL teachers. Teachers plan collaboratively weekly during common preps and professional learning, analyze student work, and discuss student progress and performance. ENL teachers modify and adjust instruction to meet the needs of their students. Teachers share best practices in order to better prepare the students for the New York State assessments and Local Measures. We maintain records and attendance through sign in sheets, rosters and consent slips. All notes and consent slips are translated to Spanish and in other languages as needed. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to keep parents and guardians engaged and informed of their child's learning and progress, workshops are offered to parents throughout the school year. The information presented at our workshops empowers our participants to be involved in their child's education in a positive way. We have established working relationships with various Community Based Organizations who help us strengthen our school community. Our parents and guardians are notified of these events via our school website, monthly calendar, fliers and e-mail reminders which are translated into Spanish and other languages as needed. P.S. 97Q. is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school, and community. When communicating with our parents and guardians who do not speak English, our staff has been very successful with utilizing the over-the-phone interpretation services offered by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Using the funds allocated for the Title III Translation Services, we have arranged for interpreters to join us on our Parent Night in September, both Parent Teacher Conferences; Fall and Spring, and the May Parent Night. We make arrangements for interpreters to be present for both of our our ENL Parent Orientation meetings. We also utilize staff members to provide translation as needed. During the course of this school year, we will make certain to have interpreters available at our workshops and meetings providing opportunities for ELLs and their parents to feel a welcome as well as a sense of belonging in the PS97Q Forest Park community. We also invite the parents/guardians of our ELLs to join us for the NYSESLAT workshop where the assessment is discussed, sample questions are viewed and parents are given an opportunity to ask questions and share their concerns. Monthly workshops for parents are organized by the parent coordinator. Other workshop topics focus on school life for students, curriculum standards, assessments as well as health and medical issues for families. Workshops are also provided by professionals at monthly PTA meetings in the areas of health, school curriculum, assessments, and other matters pertaining to family, as well as social and emotional learning. Other types of parent workshops include information about students with disabilities, instructional strategies in both English Language Arts and mathematics, preparing for New York State and New York City assessments as well as helpful test taking tips and strategies. With the guidance and support of the workshops 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities presented by school personnel, family members have learned strategies to assist their children with homework and other school related activities. Our school encourages parents to join in learning activities that can improve the quality of community and home life (library cards, Parent Teacher Association (PTA), book fairs, following directions, etc.) There are multiple opportunities for parents to receive information about school programs and student progress. Methods of communication include: phone calls, e-mails, report cards, parent conferences, student-led conferences, school website and Class Dojo. With communication in multiple forms, families find at least one way easy and useful for their lifestyle. Parents are invited to meet their child's teacher weekly during parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. Teachers and staff members also welcome parents during other scheduled visits and celebrations. Parents make a significant contribution to the environment and functioning of our school. We encourage parent volunteers and make every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. The ENL team hosts an annual International Night celebrating our school's diverse culture with music and food donated by parents. ENL teachers also host two workshops for parents on supporting their children with literacy and mathematics skills. Additionally, parents of the Saturday Global Learning Academy are invited to a culminating event at the end of the program which includes a parent workshop given by a CITE consultant. Parents are also given resources to use with their children at home. Parents are encouraged to attend PTA meetings to understand more about important information and events happening in the school and community. Additional accommodations are made for parents with disabilities so that they too can attend meetings. Through the efforts of the Parent Coordinator and the PTA President, an outreach is made to parents of students in temporary housing (STH), so that all families remain involved in all parent/school activities. Principal's Honor Roll, Honor Roll, Student and Citizen of the month along with the Big Heart Awards are celebrated monthly followed by PTA meetings. School publications (i.e. website, calendar and letters to parents) are used to inform parents of important upcoming events, including testing dates, school events, open school week, parent teacher conferences as well as the parent engagement time set aside on Tuesday afternoons. Important notices are provided in the students' home language according to our language breakdown list by class. The breakdown list is created as a result of the Home language survey completed by parents during registration. At our "Family / Curriculum Night" the parents of English Language Learners/Limited English Proficiency (ELL/LEP) students will receive an orientation session on the common core learning standards as well as the assessment, school expectations, and general program requirements for bilingual education and/or free-standing ENL programs. We maintain records and attendance through sign in sheets, rosters and consent slips. All notes and consent slips are translated to Spanish and other languages as needed. 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 14796 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Forest Park School Borough Queens School Number 097 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marilyn Custodio Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher ENL- Karen Abramowitz Teacher/Subject Area ENL-Danielle Cross Teacher/Subject Area ENL- Christina Kabbadias Related-Service Provider Nicole Vasiu Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Stella Kalogridis Coach School Counselor Cynthia Rodriguez Parent Stephanie Morra Parent Coordinator Amelia Joseph Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Asst. Principal, Denise De Jes C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 722 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 193 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.73%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment, The New York City Performance Task in ELA, Fundations and the iReady Diagnostic Assessment. Teachers also use Performance based assessments from Ready Gen to assess writing skills. Fountas and Pinnell provides us with the independent and guided reading level of our students. All teachers have a monitoring for progress folder with students levels and next steps. This information is shared with ENL teachers who can use a class graph to determine how many levels their students need to improve to be on or above grade level. Many entering ELL students begin at lower levels and teachers must provide instruction using the expected reading behaviors for the next level. The New City Performance Task in English Language Arts BOY is a writing assessment that is used as a baseline for students writing including mechanics and content. For Kindergarten the NYC Performance Task ELA provides data about letter recognition, letter sounds and reading readiness. We can use individual and group data reports from School Net to differentiate instruction and provide practice in areas of need. Teachers use common rubrics throughout the year to help students in their daily writing. Teachers focus on various writing traits to help students improve. iReady provides us with an item analysis of literacy skills and prescribes individualized instruction for students. Teachers form differentiated groups based on the data from the reports. We also use Fundations to assess early literacy skills in phonemic awareness. Using these and other formative assessments provides the necessary background about the level of ability for each ELL student. From this data, we are able to identify areas of need and address these areas in instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams work together with ENL teachers on the continuous improvement process. They work in cycles of professional learning using data from multiple assessments to determine academic and instructional gaps. Once the gaps have been identified teachers research strategies to use with students to address the gaps. Teachers plan and implement lessons using the strategies. Then the teachers use student work to determine if their work has been successful or if other steps are needed. Our professional learning schedule includes: Data Inquiry Week 1 2018-19 CEP 54  Reviewing Existing Data and Ask Questions Data Inquiry Weeks 2 & 3 Triangulate the Data Data Inquiry Weeks 3 & 4 Plan for Action Data Meeting 6 Evaluate Success and Determine Next Steps Data Meeting 7 Vertical Meeting/Sharing Best Practices & Challenges Grades K-2 Grades 3-5 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? All ELL students complete benchmark assessments and performance tasks. We evaluate the success of our program by frequently monitoring students through periodic assessments. One of our goals in the Comprehensive Education Plan includes that we will we measure progress of ELLs through Fountas and Pinnell. Students must move three reading levels in the course of a year to reach the goal. We look at the ELL subgroups on the New York State English Language Arts and mathematics assessments to determine whether our students have met the Adequate Yearly Progress. After examining NYSESLAT scores and other interim and benchmark assessments, we notice gains in ELLs’ language acquisition. The classroom teachers observe growing confidence in the children who receive ENL services. ENL service providers collaborate with classroom teachers to look at both formative and summative assessments and plan for students needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers work collaboratively in inquiry cycles using summative and formative data to determine next steps for students. Teachers will use NYS instructional reports to identify specific skills to work on with students. We work together to determine instructional and learning gaps. Teachers research strategies to address the needs of their students and then share their findings. At the end of each teacher team inquiry cycle, teachers complete an Inquiry Work Evaluation Form. Here, teachers will review and answer the following: 1. Topics Discussed 2. Which population was selected to look at 3. What specific data, information, and/or resources that were used and what story the data tells now. 4. What has been accomplished 5. What challenges are teachers still facing and questions they may have 6. What are the teachers' next steps This Inquiry Team Evaluation form serves as a reflection and addresses the interventions once the summative data has been analyzed and the inquiry cycles have come to an end. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We begin our process with Universal Screening which includes the Home Language Identification Survey to identify ELL students. Students then take a baseline assessment in English Language Arts and mathematics. The data from these assessments helps us to determine which students fall into various tiers for more intensive support. After students have received support through freestanding ELL instruction in both standalone and integrated instruction, students are invited to attend afterschool programs, where classes are based on levels of ability. We use the following strategies throughout the school day. According to the RTI framework, these strategies include, but are not limited to: a. building background knowledge: 1. starting with rich text and big ideas so students encounter and study abstract language and abstract concepts, and learn about the world 2. previewing key concepts and challenging vocabulary, as well as reviewing students’ understanding of important points 3. when possible, drawing on and using students’ home languages b. close, interactive reading aloud: 1. frontload vocabulary, sentence structures, and concepts. 2. ask open-ended questions along the way; engage students in discussion and dialogue about a big idea in the text 3. include relevant multicultural literature as well as multicultural chants, songs, and poems that help to build phonemic awareness c. storytelling using wordless books d. collaborative discussion and debate: 1. devote instructional planning and time to student projects that are discussion-based, including oral presentations and debates 2. during discussions, pose open-ended questions and keep the conversation going 2018-19 CEP 55  e. role playing and rehearsed oral performance f. multifaceted and intensive vocabulary instruction 1. study words, word parts, and word families as part of the content-based literacy instruction; build words and knowledge at the same time; include a focus on words with multiple meanings 2. include vocabulary learning strategies such as using visual cues, total physical response (TPR; i.e., physically acting out new terms), and realia g. sentence transformations through guided dialogue h. language frames for speaking and listening i. jointly constructed extended writing: 1. e.g., co-constructing a written text based on a shared classroom experience 2. connecting writing assignments to content under study; supporting with details j. explicit connections to community and content Students are provided with tiered interventions, such as response to intervention and language support in the chosen model of English Language learner instruction as well as time for teachers to work in teams. Teachers plan lessons that integrate the common core instructional shifts which identifies authentic opportunities for reading, writing, speaking and listening. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. By analyzing data patterns in the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT assessments we are able to understand students ability levels in speaking, listening, reading and writing. We can determine that students across grades have a higher proficiency level in listening and speaking modalities. The data also shows that scores in the reading and writing modalities show lower proficiency levels. We also analyze specific score breakdowns for speaking, listening, reading and writing, so we can focus instruction on our students needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL team work together to analyze results of both the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to determine grouping, scheduling and program requirements. The data is also used to determine eligibility for afterschool and Saturday programs. Teachers from the programs use the information to inform their teaching and use of materials. The ENL teachers use the data to inform the classroom teacher of student proficiency levels and the characteristics of each level. The ENL team uses EDAT to track student progress over years to identify and filter key information. We use this to better design instructional programs for ELLs as well as make data driven decisions to support the grouping and programming of ELLs to accelerate acadmic achievement. Patterns are noticed and tracked, specifically for students who are not making adequate progress. For those students, next steps are determined. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have a Kindergarten self contained classroom of ELL students that is taught by a teacher who is dually licensed in General Education and ENL. In grades one through five, students are grouped according to proficiency levels and grade. The number of minutes are determined by the students proficiency level. For example, entering and emerging students students are pulled out together. ENL teachers provide both stand-alone and integrated instruction as per CR part 154 regulations. For integrated instruction, dually certified ENL teachers provide instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction, ENL teachers have common preps with the grade they service so they can closely plan with classroom teachers. For stand-alone ENL, instruction is delivered by ENL teachers to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction is provided through both push-in and pull-out models. Both types of instruction involves high-quality student-centered instruction that incorporates academic language and appropriate levels of ENL scaffolds. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 56  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our freestanding ENL program, ENL teachers work with administrators to create a schedule including blocks of time in minutes to ensure that students are being serviced according to their levels and the mandated time in a integrated or stand alone model. The requirements for both integrated and standalone instruction will be met during the program. ENL teachers use the CR part 154 requirements ENL chart in the ELL Policy and Reference Guide to ensure the appropriate minutes re being provided. Schedules are then reviewed and approved by administrators. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone and 180 minutes of integrated instruction, for a total of 360 minutes of service per week. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone and 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction for a total of 180 minutes per week. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers provide both standalone and integrated instruction using the common core based programs: Ready Gen and Go Math. Teachers work with classroom teachers to provide support for ELL students during both models of instruction. Teachers have had training in the Universal Design for Learning and use multiple entry points when delivering instruction. Teachers build background and vocabulary by using graphic organizers or images on the SmartBoard. Lessons may include videos from Brain Pop, Brain Pop ESL, MyOn, iReady, Starfall and Raz Kids. Teachers use higher order thinking questions and open ended questions, facilitate discussions and provide opportunities for students to turn and talk and discuss key points. Teachers model skills and strategies, provide guided instruction and independent work for students when learning content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are evaluated in NYS mathematics and science in their home language (for high incidence languages). We also provide oral translations for assessments throughout the year in subjects other than English Language Arts. Our math program GO Math has Spanish texts and assessments for students. Students have the opportunity to use picture dictionaries and word to word glossaries to help with academic vocabulary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL students are grouped to receive services based on their level of language proficiency. Teachers of all levels must provide expert modeling, language rich environments, visuals, allow ample wait time and provide opportunities for students to interact. The focus for all groups is to build background knowledge and develop vocabulary and use all four language modalities. Lessons for each subgroup are differentiated according to their needs and abilities. a. Once the SIFE students have been identified, ENL teachers must provide students with a language rich environment, scaffolded instruction, extended time, reteaching strategies, use of manipulatives, use of technology and other multiple entry points for lessons. Phonics skills are reinforced through Fundations and guided reading lessons using texts of high interest and low readability level. The teacher develops language skills that will enable them to function effectively in their regular classroom. In addition, the teacher emphasizes self-esteem and confidence as they adapt to a new culture. SIFE students are also invited to the afterschool Title III program. This program includes students grouped according to proficiency levels with materials and resources customized to meet the needs of entering and emerging students. b. For Newcomers we use many of the same techniques to help these students to adjust to their new surroundings, and enable them to function effectively in their regular classroom. Texts used are predictable and patterned. Teachers provide listening opportunities. Students label diagrams using their new vocabulary. Teachers also partner students with proficient 2018-19 CEP 57  speakers to help students develop vocabulary and understand concepts. Teachers use visuals and graphic organizers to help students understand content. c. For Developing students teachers will ask open-ended questions to facilitate listening and speaking skills. Teachers will help students to build academic language. Teachers work with students to make connections and use prior knowledge to understand new content, introduce a variety of genres and text features, and provide a variety of writing opportunities. d. Long term ELL students will be provided with English language instruction and instruction in the content areas of math, science, and social studies. Although we do not currently have any long term ELL students teachers should plan collaboratively throughout the year to develop units with embedded language and literacy skills, which they then teach across all subjects. e. Former ELLS will be provided with opportunities to synthesize, analyze and evaluate oral and written communication. Students are encouraged to use reference materials and technology independently. Students will lead group discussions and participate in student generated presentations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of students that are ELLs and SWDs use multiple entry points to reach all students. All classes from K-5 use the Ready Gen and Go Math programs which are common core aligned and provide scaffolded activities for both ELLs and SWDs . Teachers of grades K-2 use Fundations a phonics based program which also has double dose lesson plans for students who have difficulty with phonics skills. Ready Gen vocabulary and grammar activities are built into lessons to help students with English language development. We also have subscriptions to individualized web based programs, such as iReady in literacy and mathematics, MyOn for reading comprehension, Reading A-Z for shared reading and literacy lessons for teachers, Brain Pop, and Brain Pop ESL. Our students have access to their own accounts and develop vocabulary and skills through prescriptive lessons and activities that each of the programs provide. ENL teachers also build background knowledge using videos and teacher created materials. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Programming includes both opportunities for students to work in small groups outside of the classroom and integrated instruction in literacy and the content areas. ELL students with IEPs that are in ICT, self-contained or general education classrooms work in the classroom with Special Education teachers and ELL teachers. Both teachers understand the IEP goals and use various strategies to help students meet their goals. Additionally, one of our ENL push-in/pull-out teachers also holds a Special Education license. This teacher services most of the ENL students in self-contained classes across grades which serves as a beneficial service to these students.ENL teachers communicate with the special educators in the building including the SETTS and RTI teachers to ensure there are no schedule conflicts. If a resolution cannot be made, ENL teachers may have a make-up period built into their schedule specifically to service students who miss a period of ENL due to another service being provided. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other core content areas that supplemental services to grades 2-5 during afterschool. Teachers in these programs use classroom data to determine which students need further development and extra support in certain areas. The primary focus is to provide additional support with the students’ acquisition of English and the development of language skills that will enable them to function effectively in their classroom both socially and academically. The teacher will base instruction on the individual needs of the students to the greatest possible extent in Language Arts and Math. Work samples are reviewed and groups are flexible. The ENL and classroom teachers use summative data and other formative assessments to group students and to plan lessons. In addition, the ELL students will practice strategies to assist them with the NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH assessments. ENL teachers also have common planning time with classroom and cluster teachers. 2018-19 CEP 58  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year our ENL teachers will have more common planning periods and common planning periods with the teachers of grades they service. ENL teachers should collaborate with classroom teachers and other service providers to improve alignment in the curriculum. This year we will expand our Saturday Global Learning Academy by including more ELLs. This year the ENL team will present a series of workshops related to academic language to staff. This year we will also conduct intervisitations between ENL and classroom teachers to observe best practices in action. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time there will be no programs discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are invited to all available programs. In addition, ELLs are offered afterschool programs in our building. ELLS in grades 1-5 that are on Entering through Expanding proficiency levels are offered the afterschool program. The program is held from November to April, twice a week on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30pm-4:00pm. It incorporates technology, math, and literacy all involving ENL scaffolds. The teachers for our title III ENL afterschool program are provided with professional development and training by our ENL teachers to share ENL strategies and best practices.We also have a Saturday Global Learning Academy for our immigrant students grades K-5. This program is held from January to March for seven weeks from 8:15am to 11:15am. This program is based on the NYS Science Scope and Sequence and takes a thematic approach. For example, at that time of the year, according to the Scope and Sequence, 5th grade should be learning about nutrition. Therefore, that topic will be theme of focus for 5th grade. In this program, ENL service is provided by an ENL teacher who pushes into each class for 30 minutes per class for eligible students. On the last day of the program, parents attend a celebration that is held to celebrate the work the students have done in this program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Throughout the building we use the Ready Gen and Go Math Programs for ELA and math curriculum. However, ELL students have scaffolded strategies and reteaching activities that provide supports if needed. We have many technology programs available to ELL students including web based programs such as: MyOn (reading comprehension), iReady (literacy and mathematics), and Brain Pop and Brain Pop ESL (videos on content material). In addition, each classroom is equipped with SmartBoards and digital tools for instruction. Other materials purchased for afterschool programs include: Sadlier Phonics Focused Reading Evan Moor Phonics for Entering students in Grades 3-5 Getting Ready for NYSESLAT Grades K-5 Finish line Math Level 2-5 Strategies for Success (Triumph) Math Level 4 Finish Line ELA Level 2-5, Picture Dictionaries (Bengali, Arabic and Spanish) for entering subgroups 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is supported whenever possible through the use of oral translators, copies of exams in high incidence languages, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries as well as picture dictionaries in Spanish, Chinese, Bengali and Arabic and google translations. Teachers use visual and diagrams to support students in understanding vocabulary and content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that all required services and resources support ELLs' ages and grade levels by using research based programs that correspond to the Common Core Learning Standards and NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. Students are grouped according to levels and ENL teachers collaborate with administrators to determine what materials are needed for different groups of students. 2018-19 CEP 59  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Throughout the building we use the Ready Gen and Go Math Programs for ELA and math curriculum. However, ELL students have scaffolded strategies and reteaching activities that provide supports if needed. We have many technology programs available to ELL students including web based programs such as: MyOn (reading comprehension), iReady (literacy and mathematics), and Brain Pop and Brain Pop ESL (videos on content material). In addition, each classroom is equipped with SmartBoards and digital tools for instruction. Other materials purchased for afterschool programs include: Evan Moor Phonics for Entering students in Grades 3-5 Sadlier Phonics Focused Reading Getting Ready for NYSESLAT Grades K-5 Finish line Math Level 2-5 Strategies for Success (Triumph) Math Level 4 Finish Line ELA Level 2-5, Picture Dictionaries (Bengali, Arabic and Spanish) for entering subgroups 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs meet their ENL teacher who helps students to adjust to their new surroundings by providing students with a tour of the building and helping students learn BICS to function in daily routines. ELL students are partnered with students who have higher proficiency levels that can help them to communicate in the classroom. The parent coordinator reaches out to ELL parents through email and provides notices in home languages. The guidance counselor is bilingual and can assist students who may have difficulty adjusting or need more support. Other staff members who are bilingual include the speech teacher, social worker, school psychologist and ENL teacher. All bilingual staff members help students with understanding school routines and expectations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL teachers work collaboratively on the continuous improvement cycle which involves looking at student work, analyzing the achievement and instructional gaps, developing goals, creating formative assessments, sharing best practices and evaluating progress. They also work with classroom teachers whose students are serviced. Other professional development sessions may include webinars, action research , DOE and district level training. ELL teachers are given a common preparation 2018-19 CEP 60  period weekly for common planning. Teachers attend workshops through the district and DOE. We also have consultants present workshops to teachers in literacy, mathematics and other content areas. Teachers also collaborate with colleagues to share best practices in meeting the standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school provides professional development for all teachers in ENL. Workshops and professional learning include webinars, CITE consultations and outside professional development. In addition, ENL teachers attend training related to the ELL Policy and Reference Guide and CR Part 154. ENL teachers also share best practices with special education teachers. ENL teachers attend outside workshops and district workshops. Agenda and sign in sheets are collected along with any other artifacts from the meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual meetings are held for parents throughout the year. Parents may meet with ENL and classroom teachers to discuss goals, language developments and language proficiency results on Tuesdays during parent engagement or at other scheduled times during the school day. Translators are hired for some scheduled meetings or staff members translate as needed. ENL teachers provide parent orientation workshops at the beginning of the year to discuss goals and answer questions about the ENL program. They also provide information about resources for parents to use at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Teachers maintain parent engagement communication logs. Each meeting has a sign in sheet. Our ENL teacher provides ESL classes for adults on Tuesday afternoon during parent engagement. 3. P.S. 97 The Forest Park School is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school and community. We have identified the following key areas that contribute to a partnership that supports greater student achievement. • The school helps ELL parents to provide for the health and safety of our children, and in the maintenance of a home environment that encourages learning and positive behavior in schools. The school provides training and information to help families understand their children’s development and how to support the changes the children undergo. • The school provides ELL parents with information about school programs and student progress. This includes phone calls, report cards, parent conferences, as well as new information on topics like school choice. (Communication will be in a form that families find understandable and useful.) • ELL parents can make a significant contribution to the environment and functioning of our school. Our school encourages parent involvement and makes every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. • The school works to assist ELL parents in having meaningful roles in the school decision-making process. The school provides parents with training and information so they can make the most of this opportunity. • ELL Parents attend two scheduled ELL Parent Orientations where they will view a video and learn of their options. These will be held in September and October. ELL Parent Orientation meetings will be provided on an individual, as needed, basis for new 2018-19 CEP 61  admits throughout the school year. There is also an ELL Parent workshop on the NYSESLAT format. • Teachers and staff members present interactive read-alouds to parents and students. Read-alouds include holidays and folktales that originate from countries around the world. Cultures are celebrated and tolerance is encouraged. * The ENL team hosted International Night where students and families were dressed in traditional clothing from their native country. Parents also prepared food from their culture. This event celebrates our school's cultural diversity. Our Parent Coordinator is responsible for promoting parental involvement and addressing parental concerns. Parent involvement will include: At our parent orientation service providers and staff members are introduced to parents. Important routines and safety issues are presented and translated. ENL Professional Development: . Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYSESLAT expectations, instructional strategies, and NYS/NYC assessments given to their children. Annual evaluation of the Parent Involvement Policy At the end of each year, the school's parent involvement policy will be evaluated for its usefulness in meeting the needs of all parents of students at the school. This evaluation will be coordinated with the executives of the PTA and the SLT, the school's parent coordinator and administration. In consultation with parents, the following activities are supported during the school year: • the ENL teacher and parent coordinator hold parent workshops in order to provide appropriate information on each program within a ten day period. • parents are also invited into the classroom to observe and engage in ENL strategies and materials • parent participation in school activities to keep parents informed of all school events Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marilyn Custodio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: 27Q097 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marilyn Custodio Title Principal Stella Kalogridis Assistant Principal Amelia Joseph Parent Coordinator Danielle Cross ENL/Bilingual Teacher Naresha Ali Parent Christina Kabbadias Teacher/Subject Area Karen Abramowitz Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Cynthia Rodriguez School Counselor Mary Barton Pierre Galvez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Denise De Jesus Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q097 School Name: PS97Q The Forest Park School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amelia Joseph Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A student is considered to have a home language other than English when (1) one question on the HLIS Part I: questions 1-4 indicates that the student uses a language other than English, and (2) two questions on the HLIS Part I: questions 5-8 indicate that the student uses a language other than English, and (3) the interview with the parent and student indicates a language other than English. Therefore, the home language is determined based on a combination of the interviews with the parent and student, and responses to the questions on the HLIS. The information offered on the Home Language Identification Survey form indicates the languages spoken in our school community and many families need translation and interpretation. ATS (RHLA) provides us with information for identifying our students’ home languages. Information is recorded on the emergency card, HLIS, and kept on file in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE (ANY) CANTONESE DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN GREEK GERMAN MANDARIN MOSSI (AKA MORE) NEPALI ENGLISH PILIPINO (AKA TAGALOG) POLISH SHINA SHINALESE SLOVAK SPANISH 38 12 40 0 3 1 1 0 1 0 712 2 2 1 1 0 377 3.19 1.01 3.36 0 0.25 0.08 0.08 0 0.08 0 59.78 0.17 0.17 0.08 0.08 0 31.65 38 12 33 2 3 1 1 5 0 1 712 2 2 1 1 1 376 3.19 1.01 2.77 0.17 0.25 0.08 0.08 0.42 0 0.08 59.78 0.17 0.17 0.08 0.08 0.08 31.57 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 66  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Blue cards, registration forms, home language survey, and program selection forms September NYCDOE Parent Orientation, Family Night School letters to parents, including permission slips for class trips and school events and other notices from the N.Y.C. Dept. of Education. September After School, Saturday and Morning Program Notices Education and District 27 school Information posted for community members Classroom teacher letters to parents, Documents from the SBST IEP Meetings and Meetings With Other Service Providers Parent Teacher Conferences Comments on report cards to parents Monthly November through May as needed BIG WORD Interpreters NYCDOE, Translation and Interpretation Unit & Bilingual Staff Members Bilingual Staff Members 2018-19 CEP 67  Conference Appointment Letters Testing and Scoring of NYS assessments Monthly Communication with Parent Coordinator As needed Letters and flyers from our parent coordinator Translation and Interpretation Unit Email Communication from Parent Coordinator As needed Bilingual Staff Members Parent Engagement on Tuesdays As scheduled Parent letters to school All appropriate school signage are displayed as required Disciplinary letters Health notices Guidance Counselor Meetings Available electronically through SESIS, Bilingual Staff Members, Bilingual Family Worker, School Psychologist and Social Worker November, March & June Bilingual Staff Members November, March & June November, March & June Available electronically through School Net According to NYS assessment calendar 2018-19 CEP 68  Weekly Bilingual Staff Members Bilingual Staff Members & BIG WORD Interpreters Weekly BIG WORD Interpreters Monthly September and October-ELL orientations Translation and Interpretation Unit Website As needed Google Translate As needed Translation and Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 69  As needed As needed Translators/Designees Scoring Site NYCDOE & Translation and Interpretation Unit Bilingual Staff Members NYC Board of Health Bilingual Guidance Counselor 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 70  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Orientation/Meet the Teacher /Sept SEPTEMBER Parent Teacher Conferences/ Parent Engagement on Tuesday Afternoons Guidance Counselor meetings, I.E.P. meetings and meetings with other service providers. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? HIRED INTERPRETERS Nov., March, & May HIRED INTERPRETERS Weekly As needed As needed Bilingual Staff Members & Over-the-Phone Interpretation Bilingual Guidance Counselor & Over-the-Phone Interpretation Bilingual Family Worker, Psychologist and Social Worker 2018-19 CEP 71  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency we have bilingual staff members who will be available to translate as needed. We also have contact information for parents who are bilingual and can help with disseminating information to other parents in the school community who speak the same language. For a language that is not- covered we will use over-the-phone interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our LAC shares with all staff the services available to us and the importance of sharing our information in the languages of our school community. Staff will be advised, via email, on a monthly basis of this information. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Based on our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs, we will perform written translation as described in Part B, #1, and will provide oral interpretation as described in Part B, #2. In accordance with Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 written notification will be sent to parents announcing the availability of translation and interpretation services at our school for activities such as parent teacher conferences, parent night (meet the teacher), ELL parent orientation and N.Y.S. testing workshops. A copy of such notification will also be kept in the main office as well as in the Parent Coordinator's office for review if needed. ELL parents indicate their oral and written communication preference on the Home Language Identification Survey. This information is entered into A.T.S. and notices are generated for families based on their language preference. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use parent meetings and workshops to obtain feedback from parents. We also use the parent survey to determine if parents are satisfied with interpretation and translation provided at our school. We want parents to feel 2018-19 CEP 72  comfortable and understand information about their child and his/her progress. We have informal conversations at Parent Teacher Conferences to monitor if parents are satisfied with translation services. 2018-19 CEP 73 
