2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q100 School Name: P.S. 100 GLEN MORRIS Principal: LAUREEN FROMBERG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Glen Morris P.S.100Q 342700010100 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 27Q100 111-11 118 th Street South Ozone Park, N.Y. 11420 718-558-1510 718-558-1519 Phone Number: Fax: Laureen Fromberg Lfrombe@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Laureen Fromberg Deborah Fiallo JasmatiiKryshuandayal Allison Cordano NaliniAziz N/A N/A District Information Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. JAmbery@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  82-01 Rockaway Blvd. South Ozone Park, N.Y. 11420 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Laureen Fromberg Deborah Fiallo JasmattiKryshuandayal GeorgiannaLuciano NaliniAziz Christine Carricato Allison Cordano Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elizabeth Reuther AdupaGopaul GaitreeMohan BibiSubhan XiomaraTejera Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to ensure we educate the “whole” child, building confident learners who are prepared to be successful in the 21 st century. Our student affirmation , “I dream big, I believe in myself, I will persist, I will achieve,” is said every morning, by all students, to motivate and inspire them. We are committed to providing a challenging program that creatively addresses the students’ academic, physical, and social needs in a safe, nurturing learning environment. We strive to cultivate knowledge based on the Common Core Standards and the individual needs of students. Our integrated curriculum will infuse the arts, have a technology focus, and be project driven. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.100 Q is located in South Ozone Park Queens. The school is comprised of 853 students. The school’s population consists of 32.83% Asian, 33.06 % Native American, 19.34%, Hispanic,6.68% Black, 4.69% White, 1.88%Hawaiian/Asian Pacific, and 1.41% Multiracial. The student body includes48.65% males and 51.35% females, with 7.03% English Language Learners. Students with disabilities make up 19.11% of the population. The attendance rate to date is 93.82%. During the 2017-2018 school year, we worked diligently to ensure all students in need of academic support received services to address their deficits. Within the school day, there is a strong emphasis on the use of technology to supplement academic instruction. Max Scholar is a multisensory literacy program used to meet students on varying levels. In order to effectively serve our Students with Disabilities (SWD), we have expanded our Special Education Lab which provides Special Education students the opportunity to utilize assistive technology, computer based programs, and individualized instruction, such as Wilson, to assist them in meeting their IEP goals. Additionally, teachers use Moby Max, an online learning experience which addresses students' learning gaps and progress monitors students' IEP goals. Beyond the school day, students in grades 3 – 5 are provided with small group support in math and literacy through the use of technology in our “Saturday Program” which runs from January through April. Our ENL teachers continue to effectively serve our growing English Language Learner population using Santillana “Spotlight on English.” We have found it particularly effective in vocabulary development and literacy through the content areas of Science and Social Studies. In addition to Santillana, we have Imagine Learning, a differentiated instructional language and literacy software program that features interactive activities, videos, and games to build reading, speaking and listening skills. In addition to students' academics, we are also committed to supporting students social emotional needs and involving parents in their children's education. Our Children Are Respectful and Responsible Everyday (C.A.R.E ) program helps to strengthen our home school connection and increase family engagement. Additionally, through the PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Support) based program students learn to appropriately manage their feelings, resolve conflicts, and acquire the social skills needed to build relationships with their peers. Student behavior is carefully monitored using SWIS (School Wide Information System) form referrals. During the 2017-2018 school year, 657 (73%) students had no SWIS forms all year! For the 2018-2019 we will continue our “Reach One Teach One” and Restorative Circle programs. Reach One Teach One is used to assist specific students with social and emotional difficulties. Individual teachers are paired with a student who demonstrates consistent, on going behavior and social issues from the past and current school year. Our Reflection Room/Restorative Circle Program is designed for students with frequent behavioral infractions. Selected students attend the program twice a week and engage in discussions with their peers to become proactive and learn strategies to build and maintain positive communication. During the 2017-2018 school year, we promoted college and career readiness among our students by dedicating a week to researching and sharing information about various colleges and careers. Parents and alumni of PS 100 were invited to come and speak to students about their career choices and college experience. In order to promote our mission of educating the “whole” child, all students participate in our visual and performing arts programs. Our LTCE/IM Program (Literacy Through Creative Expression/Instrumental Music), is an interactive music program with connections to mathematics, social studies, science and language arts. Woodwind and recorder students perform and are rated by New York State Schools Music Association (NYSSMA) judges. This past year, thirty students had the wonderful opportunity to perform at Carnegie Hall as part of Link-up the Orchestra Moves and Musical Explorers Program. Our chorus program is offered to students in the third, fourth and fifth grade students who meet academic and musical criteria. The Creative Arts Team, consisting of Drama, Dance and Visual Arts, works with all students, on a trimester schedule, allowing every child to experience the various aspects of the arts and exposes students to diversity and multiculturalism. It also serves as a positive outlet for students with special talents to “shine." Students have learned to line dance, pantomime, as well as create and design stage scenery. 2018-19 CEP 10  The students and staff of P. S. 100 are very fortunate to have many forms of technology available to them. Each classroom has an interactive white board, laptops for every student and access to tablets. “STEM” (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) teachers provide students the opportunity to extend their learning, using the Engineering Design Process. Our STEAM program adds the Arts and is being offered in classes across grades two and three. STEAM team members collaborate in planning “hands on,” experiential projects. Students in grades two and three have begun the foundational steps for coding. In the 2018-2019 school year, our students will expand their knowledge of coding through the use of our robot, NAO We are continuously striving to instill in students the importance of helping one another and supporting the community and those in need. Our student council consists of students in grades 4 and 5 who work with a teacher adviser to partner with the River Fund, establish various fundraisers, raise school awareness, and provide community outreach. During the 2017-18 school year, Student Council members were part of P.S. 100's Safety Patrol, maintaining the positive school atmosphere during morning arrival. Additionally, the Student Council partnered with our Conflict Resolution Through Organized Sports Teacher, for the Jump Rope for Heart contest. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We introduced Max Scholar to support early literacy goals. In addition, to address students needs in K-2 we are introducing the Little Red Schoolhouse in the upcoming year to provide individualized support as needed. Students with disabilities make up 16.54% of the school's population. For the 2018-19 school year, PS 100Q will have six self-contained classes (K-5), six ICT classes (K-5), two resource rooms, and Special Education lab. We mainstream our special education students for math and literacy when appropriate and for art, music, physical education and lunch. In order to address their various needs we have a multi-disciplined IEP team led by the Principal and Assistant Principal inclusive of classroom teachers, the IEP teacher, and related service providers. They meet weekly to discuss students who are demonstrating poor academic growth and/or socio-emotional problems. Additionally, they communicate with the SIT committee to ensure struggling students are receiving academic support in their least restrictive environment and that every student has a high quality IEP. For the 2018-2019 school year, special education teachers and service providers will engage in collaborative work in which they examine student work, analyze students' IEPs and share best practices. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction and effective school leadership were recognized as areas of strength on the New York City School Survey and Framework for Great Schools. The educators of PS 100Q are dedicated professionals who are creative and enthusiastic. We believe that every student can learn and be successful. By offering students a challenging curriculum and providing supports in small groups when needed, our students continue to grow academically and emotionally. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to focus on Collaborative Teachers as our teacher practice is strengthened through their planning, data analysis and sharing of best instructional strategies during team meetings. Additionally, we are always looking to increase parent involvement and build Strong Family and Community Ties. During the 2017-2018 school year, we used Student Led Conferences which increased parent involvement. For the 2018-2019 school year, every parent will be invited to attend at least one Student Led Conference where the student can present work and share accomplishments. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q100 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 957 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 75 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 46 37 37 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 61.0% % Reduced Lunch 7.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 29.2% % Black or African American 19.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.43 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES NO N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES NO N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 53 51 37 92.6% 1.1% 18.0% 7.0% 39.4% 30.6% 4 13% 10 58.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the New York State Mathematics testing data over the past 2 years shows that there was a 2% increase in the number of students achieving a 3 or 4 on the state exam. Our most recent state results indicate that 57% of students scored a level 3 or higher which is significantly above the city and district average. However, more than 40% of our students still have not met proficiency. Implementation of the Go Math Middle of the Year assessment coupled with Mathletics usage data has helped us more accurately identify and support students at risk in math . We have used this data to more effectively identify students in need of Tier II and Tier III intervention for not meeting grade level benchmarks in math. Our "Flex" period is an additional instructional period provided to students Monday- Thursday, 8:15-8:55am. Tier II students are instructed in math in a "pull out" small group. Tier III students work in small group with an RTI Math teachers. Additionally, all students will be required to complete a minimum of 30 minutes per week on the Mathletics program, providing students additional time for mathematics practice through differentiated and engaging activities. Our K-5 vertical math team meets weekly and engages in data driven inquiry work. The team analyzes data to identify areas of strength and need across all grades. The team works collaboratively to make adjustments to grade level curriculum maps and researches new instructional strategies to meet the various needs of our students. In the 2017-2018 school year, we focused on the implementation of the Math Workshop model which guides students through a process of inquiry and provides opportunities for students to demonstrate their mathematical thinking and reasoning. Additionally, we continued to utilize the instructional strategies: "Highlighting Mistakes" and "My Favorite No." These strategies require students to analyze their work, identify mistakes and make necessary corrections. Through self and peer assessment, students engage in discussion about their mistakes and provide one another with specific and meaningful feedback. Our most recent Principal Performance Observation indicated that the daily flex period enables students to receive small group instruction in Mathematics around areas of focus driven by assessment data. This work has led to increased levels of student achievement. Data from Think Central and Mathletics is used to accurately identify students at risk for not meeting mathematical standards and instruction is modified to meet their needs. Strengths: ● Most recent data indicates students’ achievement on the New York State Math Exam is above the city and district average. ● Implementing a CCLS aligned math program for all grades. 2018-19 CEP 13  Needs: ● To regularly assess student math achievement and progress ● Identify students at risk for not meeting the standards and modify instruction accordingly ● Regularly evaluate students to ensure that Tier II and Tier III students receive small group instruction to address their needs. Our priority need is to improve student math performance on both classroom and state assessments by providing tools to systematically identify and support students in need of mathematical support, as well as challenge all students to meet and exceed mathematical standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of rigorous instruction, there will be a 3% increase (from 73% to 76%) in the percentage of students in grades K-5 that achieve proficiency (level 3 or above) as measured by the 2019 Go Math End of the year assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our K-5 vertical Math team engages in data driven inquiry work to identify areas of strength and need. The team collaborates to make necessary adjustments to curriculum maps and researches new instructional strategies. Through the structure of Teacher Teams, teachers use the Rounds Protocol to examine student work to deepen professional discussions around curricula, students’ needs, and teacher practice. Teachers work collaboratively, to teach consistent, quality math instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards based on feedback from classroom observations, walk-throughs, assessments, and project based learning activities. Additionally, they will be building lesson plans and pacing calendars, based on the evaluation of student work. Our K-5 vertical Math team members serve as liaisons for their respective grades. Go Math is the primary program for our math instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year, grade level teams examined the Go Math curriculum and integrating units of study from Engage NY to ensure math instruction is fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The Mathletics program provides additional in school support and guided practice. This program enables teachers to tailor instruction to individual needs of students, as well as monitor progress while utilizing high interest activities to motivate and engage students mathematically. Response to Intervention provides small group instruction for SWDs and the lowest performing students in the general education population. General education teachers will collaborate with the Math RTI provider during push-in services to implement strategies from Metamorphsis Professional Development series to enhance instruction and further support struggling students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept 2018 All staff members through -June 2019 Sept 18 through Jun 19 Administration and math team members. Assistant Principal , RTI Math Provider, K-5 Math Team members All K-5 students Sept 2018 through June 2019 Classroom teachers All K-5 students Sept 2018 Administration and classroom teachers through Jun 2019 SWD and identified general education students All K-5 students Sept 2018 Administration, RTI Math Provider, through Jun 2019 Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 All school staff, both in classroom and out of classroom personnel. Administration, RTI Math Provider 2018-19 CEP 15 During our "flex"period all classroom teachers focus on building foundational math skills and problem solving. Bottom 1/3 of every class Sept 2018 Teachers Our Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) and ENL teachers push in/pull out to work with identified students. Saturday Academy- Intensive test preparation for homogeneously grouped students of varying levels. In addition, there will be a technology component, wherein students will be working on individually designed programs to strengthen their math skills. "Highlighting Mistakes" and "My Favorite No" strategies are incorporated into daily mathematical instruction. These strategies require students to analyze their own work and identify mistakes they made in solving problems. Through the use of these strategies, students engage in self and peer assessment and are asked to provide each other with specific and meaningful feedback. through Data Specialist SWDs ELLs Identified students in grades 3-5 All K-5 students Jun 2019 Sept 2018 through -June 2019 Jan 2019 through Apr 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 ENL teachers, Special Education teachers, SETSS providers ENL team, Special Education teachers, SETSS teachers, Principal Administration and classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -All parents have access to the Go Math Parent Academy. The Go Math Academy is an online resource that motivates kids to improve their mathematical skills while having fun with numbers. Students can review concepts previously taught and/or preview topics that have not yet been covered in the classroom. Additionally, the program provides parents with videos that show the skills and strategies being covered in the classroom so that parents can effectively help their children at home. -Grade specific Parent workshops to discuss CCLS, ways to support students at home, use of resources such as Mathletics & Think Central -Progress reports inform parents of their children's progress and provides suggestions on how they can assist/enrich their children's learning. -The Mathletics program will provide additional at home enrichment and guided practice. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mathletics, Math Coach, Parent Coordinator, Per session for before/after school programs and Saturday Academy, Guidance Counselor Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, , as a result of rigorous instruction, there will be a 1.5% increase in the percentage of students in grades K-5 that achieve proficiency as measured by the 2019 Go Math Middle of the year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be monitored using Go Math middle of the year assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In an effort to create a safe and secure environment for students, we have selected various programs to support students’ social-emotional growth. Our C.A.R.E. program (“Children are Respectful and Responsible Everyday)was developed to address and promote self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills and responsible decision-making. We dedicate one period per week as a C.A.R.E. period where teachers and students are guided by the evidence-based Second Step Program. For the upcoming year, we will be incorporating in the CARE period The MindUP Curriculum that offers lessons on how the brain functions for students to gain insight into their own minds and behaviors. Our CARE program includes a variety of incentives to reward positive behavior. The Being Unusually Good (B.U.G) program encourages students to work together as a class to earn B.U.Gs. The class on each grade with the most B.U.G.s each month is invited to a special celebration. Additionally, students have the opportunity to earn CARE Bucks for positive behavior which they can use to buy tickets to monthly school celebrations. We provide students with the supports to build self awareness and improve behaviors. In the Reach One Teach One program mentors are assigned to students using the data from the SWIS (School Wide Information System) system. During the 2017-2018 school year we added a Reflection Room/Restorative Circle Program for students with frequent behavioral infractions. Selected students attend the program once a week and engage in discussions with their peers, about proactive and positive ways to build and maintain a positive school community. For the 2018-2019 school year we will be introducing new programs to support the social emotional and academic behaviors of students. Since we have many students who come to us with little or no school experience we are creating a new program to support these K-2 students, entitled The Little Red Schoolhouse. In this program, students will receive focused, small group support to address their deficits. Additionally, we are creating a class on each grade, called Aspire, addressing the multiple intelligences and strengths of our students through the integration of the arts into the curriculum. In an effort to build students' self esteem, all classes will be offering student choice through project based learning activities. Strengths  The CARE program focuses on building character and rewarding positive behavior.  The SWIS data indicates that we have seen a decrease in the number of students who receive behavioral infractions.  Promote positive behavior and a community of collaboration through the school-wide "B.U.G." program. Needs:  To decrease the number of students who have incidents documented in the SWIS system.  To increase the frequency and immediacy of rewards for positive behavior. 2018-19 CEP 18   To increase communication and sensitivity of students for one another  Decrease the number of PPT referrals from grades k-2 Our priority need is to provide social and emotional support to students resulting in students showing growth in academic and personal behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an 5% increase (from 70%-75%) in the number of students who will achieve levels 3 or 4 in their ratings in academic and personal behaviors on their report cards, indicating the development of social emotional and academic skills. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Second Step curriculum, a developmentally appropriate behavior program, uses proactive preventative measures. It enables students to create a safe and respectful school climate, as well as strengthen students’ problem solving abilities and emotional management. Lessons from the Second Step curriculum are taught during our school wide CARE period, Friday 8:10-8:55am. A School Wide Information System (S.W.I.S.) is used by the Guidance Counselor to monitor student behavior by location, time of day, and type of behavior. Classes receive "B.UG.s" when all students in the class are exhibiting exceptional behavior. Students have the opportunity to earn CARE Bucks for positive behavior which they can use to buy tickets to monthly school celebrations. Teachers mentor individual students with records of discipline code infractions in a non-academic environment through the Reach One Teach One program. The teacher develops a rapport with that child, providing support and encouraging a positive school relationship. The Little Red Schoolhouse provides students with focused, small group support to address their deficits. The Aspire program will provide opportunities for students to participate in project based learning and integrate the arts into the curriculum. Safety committee meetings to collaborate and discuss staff and student safety. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students in grades K-5. Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Guidance counselor, Safety Committee, Classroom Teachers. All students in grades K-5. Sept 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Safety Committee, and School staff. Identified students in grades 1-5. Students will be selected using SWIS behavior data and teacher anecdotal records K-2 students with limited prior education. One class grades 1-5 Entire school community, including staff and students Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Reach One Teach One teachers Sept 2018-Jun 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teacher Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Aspire Teachers Assistant Principal and Safety Committee 2018-19 CEP 20 Guidance Counselor in conjunction with the classroom teacher provides workshops on cyber-bullying and internet safety Parents, Students February 2019 Safety Committee, Guidance Counselor There will be events through the year with each grade to recognize and reward the students who have made the right choices. The events include a beginning of the year CARE “Kickoff”, sports competitions, dance parties, and park trips. Implementation of individual classroom management systems that provides students with opportunities to make positive choices about their behavior Functional Behavior Assessments and Behavior Intervention Plans Peer mentoring Program where 3rd, 4th & 5th grade students are strategically paired with peers in need. They meet with one another weekly to discuss identified issues and resolve problems under the supervision of the Guidance Counselor. Students with disabilities Identified students in K-5 Grade 3, 4 and 5 students will serve as safety monitors and assist classroom teachers during their lunch period. Students Student Government-select students are nominated and accepted into this club in which they develop leadership skills and service learning. Select students in grade 4 and 5 Students who receive no SWIS forms during the indicated quarter Nov 2018 through Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor June 2019 Safety/CARE Committee All Students Sept 2018 Classroom Teacher through June 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 Oct 2018 through June 2019 Oct 2018 through June 2019 Oct 2018 through -June 2019 Guidance Counselor School Psychologist Classroom Teachers Guidance Counselor, Mentors from grades 3-5 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals, Social Studies teacher Reflection Room/Restorative Circle Program for students with frequent behavioral infractions. Selected students will attend the program twice a week and will engage in a discussion, with their peers, about proactive and positive ways to build and maintain a positive school community Select students in grades K-5 Oct 2018 Assistant Principals through June 2019 Teachers supervising Reflection room 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Student - Parent CARE Contract - including behavioral responsibilities, rewards, consequences, and a behavior rubric Parent assembly explains the CARE program - Breakout during Meet the Staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, CARE Committee, SWIS, PBIS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an 2.5% increase in the number of students who will achieve levels 3 or 4 in their ratings in academic and personal behaviors on their report cards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored using data from STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a building PS 100Q continues to focus on improving the communication among our varied teams to more effectively meet the needs of our students. Our recent PPO indicated that, " All teachers are involved in structured teacher teams that promote professional collaboration and achievement of the school's goals. Teachers analyze data, which connects to the Common Core Learning Standards, on groups of students they share and discuss curricular and instructional implications. Teachers have a voice around decisions that affect student learning across the school. This work has led to increased student achievement and improved teacher practice." Our teams include grade-wide teacher teams, pre-kindergarten through fifth grade, as well as vertical math, literacy, writing, special education, "Gateway", PPT and SIT committees. Teachers utilize the Rounds Protocol, which has been adapted to complete data driven inquiry cycles, to analyze student work to deepen professional discussions around curricula, trends in instruction, and ways in which to adjust instruction accordingly. Grade-wide Teacher Teams and Vertical Teams work together to identify areas of instructional needs and planning units of study that address those needs. Every six weeks, grade- wide teacher teams meet with other grades to share out their findings, implications, results and next steps. This year, when analyzing student data, the grade two team noticed that students were having difficulty mastering the reading skills assessed on end of the unit ELA exams. The team changed the weekly literacy block from a 5 day, to a 6 day schedule to allow ample time to teach and review the text based skill of the week During 2017-2018 school year, 92% of students in grades K-5 showed an increase of at least two reading levels based upon TCRWP assessment as compared to their baseline assessment. However, 40% of students are still reading below grade level. We recognize the need to support students in all grades. At P.S.100Q there are systems in place to ensure that teachers on each grade level work together to plan and deliver targeted instruction for each student. Strengths: ● Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to revise curriculum based on information obtained during teacher team meetings. ● Grade level and vertical teams meet weekly and monthly to discuss student progress, identify strengths and areas of improvement, common trends, and implications for teacher practice. ● Classroom inter-visitations and shared best practices 2018-19 CEP 23  Needs: ● Increase students’ literacy proficiency using the Max Scholar program ● Time designated for out of the classroom and classroom teachers to meet to discuss the progress of students Our priority need is to provide frequent opportunities for teachers to collaborate with one another to evaluate student needs and plan strategies so that students’ deficiencies and strengths are effectively addressed in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers working collaboratively in teams to plan and make adjustments to literacy lessons, 60% of K-5 students (reading below a level X in September) will show an increase of at least 3 reading levels on the Teachers College Reading Writing Program (TCRWP) Assessment, when compared to their baseline TCRWP Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). TCRWP assessment three times a year All students Nov/Dec 2018 Classroom Teachers, Administrators Feb 2019 Jun 2019 Max Scholar beginning of the year assessment and progress monitoring every 6-8 weeks to determine AIS. All students K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Administrators All K-5 classroom teachers will be utilizing a combination of components from Reading Street and Max Scholar programs. The Reading Street program serves as our primary instructional program, while we infuse elements of the Max Scholar enrichment and intervention. Teachers will participate in professional development and work collaboratively with their grade level colleagues to analyze trends and develop targeted instruction . Students will be using the individualized, multisensory, computer based program, Max Scholar. Our classroom teachers will continue to engage in guided reading each day to support students' needs by working with students in small groups to address deficiencies demonstrated through Max Scholar. Teachers will collaboratively plan with colleagues on their grade to develop targeted lesson plans, tasks and rubrics to meet their student needs. Teachers will consult with their Literacy Team grade representative to relay grade-wide concerns, ideas, and strengths to provide targeted instruction. Assistant Principals, All teachers Assistant Principals, Teacher leaders Assistant Principals, Classroom teachers Classroom teachers, RTI literacy teacher, ENL teachers, SETSS providers All students in grades K-5 All classroom teachers, RtI, AIS and SETSS providers All students grades K-5 Sept 2018 through June 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 Oct 2018 through June 2019 Students Sept 2018 through Jun 2019 Weekly teacher teams and Tuesday professional developments 2018-19 CEP 25 An RtI teacher will work in small groups with those students who are not showing progress using Max Scholar and SPIRE. Lowest 1/3 and Students with Disabilities Sept 2018 through RtI teachers and Assistant Principals Lab established for Students with Disabilities in which they utilize computer programs and assistive technology to address their unique needs and receive small group instruction. Identified students with disabilities Our Saturday Academy works to strengthen comprehension skills of students of varying abilities. Approximately 15 students are in a group based on need. Identified students by literacy scores and teacher recommendation ENL instruction is provided through push in and pull out groups. Student performance data is reviewed at Teacher Teams with ENL teachers ELLs Schedule and implement on-going Response to Interventions cycles to support students as risk as identified in Max Scholar benchmarks and TCRWP. Students in K-5 Principal, Special Education teacher June 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 4hrs per Saturday, Jan 2019- Principal, Assistant Principal, Saturday Teachers May 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018 Dec 2018 February 2019 Classroom and ENL teachers Administration, Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade literacy nights for parents Grade wide parent workshops providing information and resources to support literacy learning Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, teachers will be scheduled for collaborative planning, Reading Street ELA materials, Max Scholar, TCRWP assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  By February 2019, 40% of students will show improvement in reading as evidenced by an increase of at least 2 reading levels, from the baseline TCWRP assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCWRP assessment, Reading street middle of the year benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The recent Principal Performance Observation indicated that " Administrators and teacher leaders are able to identify distributed leadership structures that are deeply rooted in the daily operation of the school community. This is evidenced by the variety of vertical teacher teams facilitated by staff. A variety of teacher leaders serve as a conduit for teacher input in strategic decisions that affect the overall improvement of teaching and learning." Ms. Fromberg provides opportunities for the professional growth of teachers and staff in order to ensure the effective delivery of instruction and support to drive student achievement. At the end of each school year, the Principal meets with all teachers to discuss their accomplishments and areas of concern. During "Lunch with Ms. Fromberg" teachers frequently expressed the need for increased focus on students' writing needs. During the 2017-2018 school year a writing team was established to develop a K-5 writing curriculum which was comprised of components from Reading Street and Max Scholar. For the upcoming school year, the writing curriculum will be expanded to include strategies addressing learning gaps. All students will be assessed in writing in the beginning of the year, middle of the year, as well as end of the year. The vertical writing team will use this data to engage in inquiry work to identify areas of strength and need, collaborating to make necessary adjustments to writing units and research new instructional strategies. During the Monday PD time, teacher leaders will provide grade teams with methods to support students. Grade level teams will develop rubrics and check lists to ensure that expectations of students are clear and writing skills are developed. In a recent PPO, it was indicated that a next step should be to "share best practices on providing age appropriate, rubric based check lists and comments that will allow all students to identify their own next learning steps for improvement." In an effort to do that, opportunities for students to engage in self and peer editing of their writing will be a focus in all classrooms. Since many of our students enter our school with limited English and literacy skills, our priority need is to provide professional development for staff and strategies to build students' writing skills and include daily opportunities for writing in all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 28  By June 2019, as a result of as a result of administration and team leaders providing professional development for teachers on the writing process, there will be a 5% increase (from 65% to 70%) in the percentage of students in grades K-5 who have achieved proficiency in writing as evidenced by end of year writing assessment. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Meet with teachers at initial planning conference to set professional goals for the school year, focused on implementing the writing process. All Teachers Sept. 2018 Administration Teachers will participate in Professional Development sessions concentrating on strategies to incorporate writing in instruction. All Teachers Sept 2018-May 2019 Provide opportunities for collaboration among teachers through inter-visitations. All teachers Oct 2018- May 2019 Administration, Writing Team Teachers Administration Teachers will work collaboratively with their grade level colleagues to analyze trends and develop targeted instruction . Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Our K-5 vertical Writing team engages in data driven inquiry work to identify areas of strength and need. The team collaborates to make necessary adjustments to writing units and researches new instructional strategies. All teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration, Vertical Team Students will be given opportunities to self edit and peer edit their writing. Students Students will publish final writing pieces at the end of each writing unit. Parents will be invited to writing celebrations. Students, Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Teachers Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners' progress will be provided with strategies during small group instruction. SWDs & ELLs Sept 2018-June 2019 Special Education and ENL Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade wide parent workshops providing information and resources to support rigor and foster student accountability and ownership. Parents will be invited into classroom for celebrations of final writing presentations. School website will inform parents of writing units and assignments. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Reading Street, Max Scholar, Monday Professional Development, Microsoft One Drive Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, , as a result of as a result of administration and team leaders providing professional development for teachers on the writing process, there will be a 2% increase in the percentage of students in grades K-5 who have achieved proficiency in writing as evidenced by middle of year writing assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Writing Rubric Beginning, middle and end of the year writing assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-18 school year, P.S100Q teachers and staff offered grade-wide parent workshops on the following topics: literacy, math, grade expectations, STEM and STEAM, library initiatives, guidance, attendance, and bullying. Monthly workshop were provided by each cluster teacher to include a hands on learning experience for parents and students. We extended the use of Student Led Conferences which were conducted on Tuesdays during parent engagement time. Feedback from parents indicated that they thought the Student Led Conferences were beneficial and gave them insight into their child's learning. One parent said "I liked how it develops student confidence when they talk about their achievements, progress and challenges." In an effort to increase the number of parents involved and participating in meetings, staff conduct workshops at varying times; morning, afternoon, and evening.Through surveys, we identify parents specific interests and offer workshops from community based organizations on important topics. Since we recognize the critical role of parents as partners, our goal is to bring parents into the school and increase communication between staff and parents and between parents and students. We have found that Student Led Conferences have been the most effective way of directly connecting parents to the school community and building student self esteem. Therefore, our priority need is to increase the number of parents participating in Student Led Conferences with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of parent coordinator and teacher outreach, there will be a 5% increase (from 85% to 90%) in parents who will attend at least one Student-Led Conference. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will collaboratively plan and develop a calendar of parent workshops/events pertinent to their grades. Parents Events including: Music Show, "CAT" Shows, Science/STEM Fair Select students and parents Oct 2018- May 2019 Administration. Teachers Dec 2018 Administration May 2019 STEAM teachers All teachers will invite parents to two student-led conferences for all children in their class. Students, parents Nov 2018-June 2019 Administration, Expand our workshops focusing on the ELL population by implementing “Story Explorers,” a parent/child class where students read a story and create a craft while practicing the English language and building social skill. Parent workshops for use of computer based programs and assistive technology Use of school messenger to inform, encourage, and support parent workshops and events taking place. Increase the use of social media. Create a parent survey to gather information on the times and types of workshops that parents would like to attend, as well as at home technology availability information Create relationship with community based organizations to provide parents with information and resources that focus on non-academic issues. The focus could include health/ nutrition, fire safety, CPR, and stress reduction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ELL Parents Nov 2018-May 2019 Oct 2018- May 2019 Parents of students with disabilities Parents Sept2018 Jun 2019 Parents Sept 2018 Teachers Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers and Administration Parent Coordinator, Special Education Teachers, SETSS Providers, and Administration Parent Coordinator, Administration Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Administration, SLT Parents Nov 2018 -June 2019 Parent, Administration, CBO If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 21st Century program 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator, school messenger, school wide or grade specific event calendars, emails, and survey monkey. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of parent coordinator and teacher outreach, there will be a 2% increase in parents who will attend at least one Student-Led Conference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets for workshops/conferences, teacher communication logs, school survey results, school-wide parent engagement log and student led conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -NYS ELA exam results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -Max Scholar Small Group During school day -Guided Reading One to one -Reading Street Beginning of the Year Benchmark Scores -SPIRE -Teacher recommendations -Max Scholar Screener -TCRWP -NYS Math exam results -Go Math Beginning of the Year Baseline Scores -Teacher recommendations -MathleticsData Teacher recommendations Mathematics Science Saturday RTIgroups Problem Solving Small Group During school day One to one Saturday RTIgroups One period per week Services provided during the school day Mathletics MobyMax Hands on experiments infused with classroom instruction Science lab 2018-19 CEP 35  Social Studies Teacher recommendations Group projects/research One period per week At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SWIS Peer Mentoring Classroom Dojo Restorative Circles Parent request Counseling Teacher request One to One counseling ERSS counseling Small group counseling Services provided during the school day During school day PPT referral 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students will be seen by the guidance counselor. Families will receive support from the parent coordinator and guidance counselor. Additionally, we purchase supplies such as notebooks, books, and book bags. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Networking within District 27 to find excessed staff known as ATR’s. The personnel secretary will work closely with the HR point person to ensure that non- HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Professional development is planned using teacher goals, requests, Advance data and building needs. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers. Teachers meet with their colleagues regularly during weekly teacher team and common planning periods to collaborate and support one another. Vertical teams for math, literacy, writing, special education, and "Gateway" meet weekly to ensure teachers are supported. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Ongoing Professional Development and Teacher Team meetings each Monday and other professional duties on Tuesdays, provide time for grade wide instructional unit planning for ELA and Math. Common Planning periods were created to help teachers prepare grade level curriculum and differentiated instruction activities in Math, ELA, Science and Social Studies. Vertical Math, Literacy and Writing teams enable a teacher on each grade to become more involved in a subject area in order to assist their grade level and/ or school-wide colleagues. These teams are used for inquiry work and to review grade-wide implications. Teachers have been scheduled to attended several workshops offered by different educational services and turn-key at teacher teams. Additionally, we have scheduled common planning for our vertical Special Education Team, STEM/Gateway Team, Aspire Team and SIT Committee allowing time for colleagues to collaboratively plan, target instruction, and evaluate ways to "fill in gaps" and/or enrich learning to assist in making our students successful. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 39  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-kindergarten will begin its fourth year in our building. We plan to continue to work in collaboration with the Pre-K teachers and staff to ensure they are a part of the PS 100Q community. This will be accomplished through regular assessment of student needs, and student participation in out of the classroom activities including music, art, and academic support. Students who are entering PS 100 in Kindergarten are invited to attend an orientation with their parents prior to attending the school where they meet the administrators, teachers and support staff. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers within P.S.100Q have the opportunity to voice their opinions and ideas regarding student assessment during Teacher Teams, Vertical Teams, and Common Planning periods. This encompasses all grades and out of the classroom teachers. Professional development opportunities are established using a combination of the Needs Assessment form, Professional Learning Committees ideas, data from Advance, suggestions from the RTI team, and the necessities of the school building. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 40  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b,5c, 5d,5e 5d 5a,5c, 5e 5a , 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 492,044.00 95,603.00 12,366.00 0 5,439,266.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 41   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology programs to support learning; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Hosting an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Workshop  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent Teacher Conference and throughout the school year  Encouraging meaningful participation on the School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee  Establishing a parent resource center/area or lending library; instructional materials for parents and/or access to technology resources  Hosting events to support: men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents, and foster parents  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to parents to keep them informed about school activities and student progress  Developing and distributing information using school's phone system and on school website/ to keep parents informed about school activities  Providing written communication between teacher/home in a format and to the extent practical in languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, afternoon and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s school ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 46   Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ●promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ●communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ●become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 100Q is an elementary school in District 27. The total school population is 972 . The total number of English Language Learners (ELLs) is 90, K-5. The most current data from the 2017 NYSESLAT indicates that of those students tested in grades 3-5, 2 students are Entering, 2 are Emerging, 17 are Expanding, and 14 are Commanding. The results of the NYS ELA exam demonstrate a need to improve student performance to meet standards, particularly in reading comprehension and multiple choice questions. The results of the NYS Math test indicate a need for translators for students of Spanish and Arabic origin. The major languages spoken by our ELLs are Spanish and Punjabi. The NYS math scores increased for our ELLs due to use of interpreters and bilingual tests during NYS math exams. Our supplemental program will be facilitated by a certified ENL teacher offering additional instructional time for our ELLs through a Saturday program which will focus on increasing linguistic and academic performance affording the students additional opportunities to practice skills in English . The program will be held Saturdays, each session will be 4 hours from 8:30am to 12:30pm, and will run from Jan 5, 2019- Apr 29, 2019 (except 2/23/19 and 4/20/19) for a total of 15 Saturdays. Parents will be notified of the program by a letter being sent home in the parents native language. The day will be compartmentalized into four, one-hour periods. Students will move with their assigned homogenous groups from class to class every hour. The four classes (periods) are as follows: Reading, Writing, Math and Technology-Based Instruction/Assessment. The materials used are Motivation ELA and NY Ready Math. Our technology component will be a combination of the Mathletics program and Motivation ELA Assessment. The ENL teacher will provide professional development for the teachers providing instruction on Saturdays. Professional development will be focused on strategies and best practices to use for ELL instruction. The facilitating ENL teacher will also attend the Saturday program once a month and model best practices. Students will use the English language in both the understanding of mathematical problems and the discussion of solutions. Through linking the reading and math elements of the program, students will make connections that are a bridge to the real world. Students will use manipulatives to progress from concrete to abstract concepts. Activities will center on collecting, tabulating, representing, and interpreting data. Through the use of graphs, charts and other visual stimuli, mathematical concepts will be explored. Language development will be enhanced through the use of word problems and spoken discussion of solutions. Throughout the literacy and math instruction, skills and strategies taught will prove beneficial to the students when they take the NYS ELA and Math exams. Teachers will assess student progress through: teacher generated pre-and post-tests, observations, individual conferencing, work portfolios, oral and written communication and our technology based assessment program "Test Tracks.". Teachers will maintain an ongoing log of student progress, inclusive of item skill analysis and a checklist of acquired skills. These tests and checklists will define student progress. Additionally, teachers will keep a record of student attendance. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The funding will allow the school to implement and sustain language instruction for LEP students during and beyond the school day. There is a need to improve teacher practice to support increased student performance. Teachers of ELL students will have an increased opportunity to improve their practice, deepen content/subject knowledge and increase their understanding of student needs and strengths and will be provided with professional development. PD is being provided throughout the year during PD time (2:20- 3:40pm) . Topics of the PD include scaffolding reading instruction through the use of explicit vocabulary, scaffolding reading strategies during ENL instruction and differentiating instruction to address needs of all ELLs. ENL teachers will support the school staff to gear their teaching to the specific needs of the ELLs in their classes. ELL teachers will be providing PD and will be turn keying information and strategies taken from the ongoing EILI meetings in small groups to all Title III teachers as well as all staff. Our PD has, and will continue to positively impact the progress of our ELLs, with evidence showing that ELLs receiving a NYS ELA score of 2, 3, or 4 has risen from 4% (2016/17) to 44% (2017/18) and ELL NYS Math scores of 2, 3, and 4 have risen from 21% (2016/17) to 61% (2017/18). Agendas, attendance and students notes/progress reports are collected weekly and maintained in a binder by administration. The information gathered from the notes and progress reports are shared with each student's classroom teacher and are discussed at their grade meetings and during PD time. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will provide two workshops for the parents of our ELL students. These workshops will acquaint parents of students in grades 3,4,5 with the academic requirements for their children in literacy and math. Parents will become familiar with the program's organization procedures with regard to how the teachers provide small group and individualized instruction. Workshops will include information on the promotional criteria for ELL students. This is not being charged to Title III. These 60 minute parent workshops will be held on Nov 28, 2018 and Apr 17, 2019. In order to account for the parents that attend, parents will be asked to sign in when they attend the meeting. A copy of the agenda and sign in sheet for each workshop will be kept for school records. Parents will be instructed on how to provide help for their children at home and how to communicate with the teacher. Instructional strategies, homework assistance and preferred environmental conditions will be discussed. We will also conduct a 1 1/2 hour Open House on 1 2018-19 CEP 51 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Saturday, for parents to view the program in action and to participate in an activity with their child. A follow up question and answer period will occur as well. All written communication, including progress reports, meeting notices, brochures and flyers to parents are sent home in English and translated versions, where applicable. Our Parent Coordinator will support efforts to involve parents in the school and community. Interpreters will facilitate communication with parents in their native language, where applicable. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Glen Morris Borough Queens School Number 100 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laureen Fromberg Coach Debbie Fiallo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kelly Reis/ Andrea Wolf Teacher/Subject Area Lise Zeloof/Science Teacher/Subject Area Marcella Scire/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Lisa Mulqueen Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Elisa Kearney Coach MIchelle Karin School Counselor Christine Lozado Parent type here Parent Coordinator Evelyn Orsisni Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 807 Total number of ELLs 78 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.67% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early literacy skills of ELLs are assessed using TCRWP, regular sight word assessments and Reading Street assessments as well as Max Scholar (Orton Gillingham). The data shows that in the early grades (K-2), ELLs consistently struggle with rhyming, blending and segmenting, listening comprehension, as well as decoding and spelling. This information is used to drive instruction, determine reading levels and to help differentiate guided reading groups during the literacy blocks. The data is also used to determine which students will receive RTI or AIS for extra support. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 54  Time is given for common planning/teacher teams to generate language objectives as well as planning the implementation of ENL strategies to support ELLs while planning units of study. ENL teachers attend professional development offered by the FSC, EILI, and turn key effective teaching strategies to teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs are based on test scores, classroom work, baseline assessments and classroom checklists and observations. Baseline assessments include the beginning of the year Reading Street literacy and Go Math baseline assessments, as well as mid-year and end of the year literacy and math assessments, in addition to TCRWP assessments which are ongoing throughout the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? When analyzing data, we look for students who are not exhibiting growth. These students are identified as needing intervention and are referred to the school's PPT team that meets on a weekly basis. The team looks at the students profile, scores and progress and discusses possible interventions for this individual child. Interventions are put in place for a 6-8 week cycle. At the end of the cycle, the team analyzes the students progress to determine if the intervention was successful, if it should continue and/or if more intensive interventions are necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier I- all students are provided rigorous and evidence based curriculum in literacy (Reading Street) And Math (Go Math) that are heavily aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. The data used for tier I are baseline assessments from Reading Street for grades K-5 to assess whether the students will need Tier II intervention as provided as differentiated instruction within the curriculum for both reading and math. Tier II groups are formed based on the previous years state ELA and Math scores. ELLs are hand picked to join such groups for intensive targeted intervention (FLEX) in literacy in the morning and after school groups in math, in addition to ELL services and accommodations. Tier III groups may receive "at risk" SETTS or an opportunity to participate in the "RTI" lab. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from these assessments are used in various ways. Using the NYSESLAT score data from the RLAT, our ELL team can formulate heterogeneous and/or homogeneous groups by grade (or bridged 2 consecutive grades). This data is utilized to formulate language objectives based on outcomes of each modality on the NYSESLAT. The ELA and Math scores are used to determine which area of integrated instruction is most appropriate. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? PS 100 utilizes a data specialist who records and keeps track (via RESI report) all assessment outcomes (including NYSESLAT, ELA, MAth and benchmarks. All assessment outcomes are tracked on this living document. This document is made available on the the "One Drive," to all teachers and administration. In addition, the ENL teachers attend grade meetings to share the NYSESLAT scores for individual students, and what the language proficiency level means. Grade level teachers participate in teacher team meetings on a weekly basis. The teams utilize the Rounds Protocol to analyze student work and progress, research new interventions and approaches, implement new strategies, collect data and finally analyze results to make curriculum modifications. In addition to teacher teams, PS 100 has a vertical Literacy and Math team that meet on a weekly basis to analyze assessment data and make adjustments to school wide programs. The RTI team meets on a monthly basis to analyze the assessment results of targeted students and to determine next steps and possible interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Standalone ENL is delivered by TESOL certified teachers via pull-out. Students are grouped in several different ways. Typically, grade levels are grouped together with mixed proficiency levels. At times, the same grade will be grouped with homogeneous proficiency levels. In some cases, homogeneous proficiency levels are grouped across a consecutive bridged grade. Standalone ENL is based on foundational English to acclimate newcomers (0-1.5 years) to their new language. Students are taught "survival English," in the first six months. Furthermore, Stand Alone focuses on the language skills needed in order to function and communicate with classroom teachers as well as peers and interact with the curriculum. This is accomplished through thematic units with heavy visual and audio support, as well as opportunities for students to practice their language skills with each other. Stand Alone also uses an RTI interactive computer based program called Max Scholar (Orton Gillingham) to teach early phonics, reading skills, fluency, spelling rules and of recently writing. Integrated ENL is delivered by a TESOL certified teacher and a content area teacher, or a dually certified TESOL/Content area teacher via push-in. The students are grouped by grade level and may be mixed proficiency levels. K-2 focuses on vocabulary and verbal skills, both for social and academic interaction, as well as early literacy and writing skills while introducing age appropriate content material. Grades 3-5 will engage in "novel studies." These novel studies use higher leveled books. The focus is teaching language through literary works. All of the objectives, language targets and group-based activities come directly from the common core learning standards. The main focus for our ELLs is reading fluency, the acquisition and use of academic language, as well as developing and furthering their lexicon. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The staff, administration and compliance specialist work together to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided. PS 100Q assures the students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes by adhering to a schedule that is guided by the new CR-Part 154 ELL policy, reviewed by an administrator and compliance specialist. Explicit ESL instruction is delivered in each program model according to the new CR- Part 154 regulations; *Entering ELLs: 360 minutes (180 min of stand alone ENL and 180 min integrated ENL/ELA) , *Emerging ELLs: 360 minutes (90 minutes ENL stand alone and 180 minutes ENL/ELA integrated and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA or content area) *Transitioning ELLs: 180 minutes (90 min ENL/ELA and 90 ENL/ELA integrated or content area) *Expanding ELLs: 180 minutes (180 minutes of ENL/ELAor content area) *Commanding ELLs: 90 minutes 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 56  P.S. 100Q delivers explicit ENL instruction to teach language and literacy across the content areas using Santillana Spotlight on English. The thematic program incorporates instructional strategies and ENL methods to promote language acquisition and vocabulary development. Strategies utilized include cognitive, meta-cognitive, scaffolding and affective strategies. Students interact with content material that is relevant to the academic subject of study in their classrooms. Language development is infused through the content areas in accordance with the research of A. Chamot and M. O’Malley (the CALLA approach). Curriculum objectives have also been restructured in accordance with the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL teachers have attended monthly ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI) provided by Queens South Field Support Center. During these meetings, ELL teachers and administrators acquired new teaching strategies and techniques to support ELLs and make learning new information more comprehensible as well as foster language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? NA 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are given Imagine Learning. Imagine learning a technology based program to expedite language acquisition for newcomers and struggling students. This program supports the student using their home language and gradually transitions them to all English, while teaching the necessary literacy skills to be successful in the general classroom. Newcomers are also provided AIS/RTI services in order to build basic skills. Additionally, they are given grade appropriate ENL instruction. Newcomers (0-3 years) can receive ENL and AIS. They also receive ENL Saturday instruction. ELLs that are now mandated to take the ELA after one year are afforded the same opportunities as their monolingual counterparts such as Saturday Academy; academic and "testing language" are infused in both the ENL and ELA cirriculum. ELLs taking the ELA participate in all practice tests and periodic assessments and utilize Motivation ELA. Long term ELLs receive intensive grade appropriate instruction in reading and writing as well as AIS and Saturday academy. They participate in the same instructional programs as monolingual students. These programs are aligned with Common Core Standards, as well as with the school’s core curriculum. Former ELLs continue to receive testing accommodations for the following two years and also receive transitional ENL services during that time. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are serviced as per their IEP and their goals are taken into consideration when planning and differentiating. ELL SWD are exposed to the same academic content (Reading Street, Mentoring Minds, New York Ready, and Go Math as general education and monolingual students. The ENL teacher pushes in to the special education classroom during literacy and content areas to co-teach and work in small groups. The ENL teacher and the special education teacher utilize various instructional strategies to provide access to academic content. For example, teachers use various visual cues, front load vocabulary, provide students with scaffolds and differentiate instruction. In order to accelerate English Language development, ENL and classroom teachers have a language objective for each lesson. Teachers implement strategies learned at the districts EILI such as: One Page Wonder, Do-it, Talk-it, Read-it, Write it and picture walks. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher plan collaboratively to meet the needs of ELL SWD. Additionally, students are provided with individualize instruction to provide access to academic content areas through the use of technology based programs that target specific areas and can be programmed and assessed by all teachers on the team. Such programs are Max Scholar, Moby Max, Imagine Learning and Mathletics. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility are used to enable ELL-SWD to achieve IEP goals and English Proficiency through collaboration of ENL teachers and classroom teachers. ENL teachers are given time to plan with the classroom 2018-19 CEP 57  teachers to ensure that ELL-SWD are provided with the necessary modifications, accommodations and instructional moves to provide access to academic content. ENL teachers use flexible scheduling when working with ELL-SWD. Typically, ENL teachers push into special education classes for the entire number of allotted minutes based on students proficiency level. ENL teachers also collaborate with student's other service providers to ensure all of the students needs are met. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention Programs for ELA: -RTI III Language Lab Phonics-Wilson -RTI II Small group literacy instruction -Saturday Academy -Individualized instruction through computer programs such as: Max Scholar (phonics, reading, writing), Moby Max and Imagine Learning -At Risk SETTS Targeted Intervention Programs for Math: -RTI: Flex groups- small group math instruction provided on a daily basis -RTI II-small group instruction for targeted students. -Re-teach and intervention math lessons through GO Math -Individualized instruction through computer programs such as: Think Central, Moby Max, and Mathletics -At risk SETTS 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs include "Max Scholar" and "Moby Max" 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded access to the same programs as monolingual students. Title III is used to form Saturday classes and purchase supplemental materials for ELLs. In addition, many of our ELLs are involved in chorus, instrument recorder, NYSSMA where students participate in a concert at Carangie Hall, and STEM where students engage in hands-on, projects based , learning. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. -Reading Street Literacy -Go Math intervention strategies -Imagine Learning, Moby Max, Max Scholar and Mathletics, hands on Science experiments, STEM. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, home language support is provided by paraprofessionals or school staff as needed. Special technology applications are utilized to bridge the language gap between student and teacher. The Spanish LAB is our only means to assess Spanish home language proficiency as mandated by New York State. We do not have DL or TBE in our school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL students are grouped by NYSESLAT levels and by grade/age, if possible. Funds made available for ELLs are used to purchase resources, i.e. materials, to support the CCLS and to supplement current programs (Go Math, Reading Street) with 2018-19 CEP 58  ELL components. Students are provided with individualized instruction through the use of technology programs such as Max Scholar, Imagine Learning English and Moby Max. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Administration holds orientation meetings for parents of all students prior to the start of each school year. Interpreters are present and parents are able to ask questions and tour the school. These meetings are held throughout the school year as new students enter, they receive the same information. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Once a month on Monday afternoons, ENL teachers will conduct PD based on data from surveys from teachers. Some possibilities include: October, 2017 ENL PD: How to write language objectives grades Prek-2 November, 2017 ENL PD: How to write language objectives, grades 3-5 December, 2017 ENL PD: Strategies on how to "Prepare the Reader." January, 2018 ENL PD: Strategies on how to write "text dependent questions" and how to "interact with text." February,2018 ENL PD: Testing and ELLs. Tips and strategies to help prepeare all ELLs for standardized testing. March, 2018 2018-19 CEP 59  ENL PD: Science and ELLs-Teaching academic content in science and different ways hands-on activities can help ELLs of all language levels. Revisit ENL strategies and developing content related vocabulary. Discussion of Spanish cognates and similarities to English. NYS approved bilingual dictionaries April,2018 ENL PD: Math and ELLs-Math the Universal Language. Strategies to help ELLs successfully solve multi-step word problems. Vocabulary related to operations. Discussion of Spanish cognates and similarities to English. NYS approved bilingual dictionaries. May, 2018 ENL PD: NYSESLAT-Overview and analyze rubrics. Use of rubrics in the classroom to help differentiate instruction for ELLs. June, 2018 ENL PD: Wrap up: Celebrate successes and share challenges. Collaborate on next years approch. What worked, what didn't. In addition to school-wide CCLS PD, the ENL teachers attended outside the building PD (ELL Instructional Leadership Insitute) held by Queens South Field Support Center (FSC) on various topics as they relate academic language development, and new teaching strategies to support teachers of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For ENL Teachers, 50% of their professional development, administration provides opportunities for ENL teachers to attend citywide workshops, including ELL Instructional Leadership Institute held by the Deputy Director for ELLs and the ELL coordinator on various topics as they relate to CCLS and ELLs. Additionally, other citywide PDs include parent/community outreach in collaboration with the parent coordinator, networking meetings, as well as workshops related to Co-teaching and Integrated ENL. This represents 50% of total hours of professional development for ENL teachers. For other teachers of ELLs, ENL teacher (as stated above in calendar of PD) will provide and sometimes turnkey professional development sessions every Monday of the month. This exceeds the 15% of total hours for other teachers of ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents have the opportunity to meet with teachers on a weekly basis, or as they feel is necessary. The provisions for interpretation and translation are as followed: Signs are up at the security desk and main office communicating that all languages are available, to point at their language, and we can assist from there. These signs were provided by the Language Access Kit. In addition, there is a phone number to call to get immediate help with all languages. An over-the-phone intepreter is provided almost immediately. Language interpretation services are also utilized to provide on site interpreters, and documents translated as needed. In addition, Student led conferences ensue, once the child has developed their language skills. Goals and progress are discussed from child to parent using the teacher as a facilitator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 60  Workshops and meeting are held several times a year. These workshops include: 1. Introduction to math and the common core standards. Here parents of ELLs are provided with an opportunity to look in depth into the math program. They are familiarized with the vocabulary associated with the lessons. Interpreters are provided for questioning in several languages. Parents are given bilingual math workbooks to take home should they need extra support. 2. Parent coordinator, ENL teachers and literacy teachers run a hands on literacy ELA workshops where parents have the opportunity to engage with practice ELA exams. They are familiarized with what to expect as well as given information on how to help their child at home. Again, interpreters are provided to accommodate parents linguistic needs. 3. Health and nutrition workshops were also offered to encourage healthy eating among immigrant population. Parents were given the opportunity to participate in cooking healthy meals and are taught how to prepare them at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laureen Fromberg, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Glen Morris Elementary School School DBN: 27Q100 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laureen Fromberg Title Principal Ivana Reimer Evelyn Orsini Kelly Reis NA Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Marcella Scire/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Lise Zeloof/Science Teacher/Subject Area Debbie Fiallo Michele Karin Coach Coach Christine Lozado School Counselor Mary Barton Andrea Wolf Evelyn Orsini Lisa Mulqueen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ENL Teacher Other Parent Coordinator Other Related Service Provider NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 NA 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 NA 6/28/17 6/28/17 NA 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q100 School Name: Glen Morris Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kelly Reis ESL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents fill out a language report at the beginning of the school year and they advise the school of the primary language used at home. Then these reports are used to determine how progress reports, meeting notices, official school memos, and informational flyers need to be translated in order for the parent community to be well informed in their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 64  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Dutch Haitian Creole Hindi English Punjabi Spanish Urdu 8 5 1 1 1 750 12 53 4 .96 .6 .12 .12 .12 89.82 1.44 6.35 .48 10 8 1 1 1 741 14 55 4 1.2 .96 .12 .12 .12 88.74 1.68 6.59 .48 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly Progress Reports Every Month Report Cards November, March, June Meeting Notices Weekly/Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated by school staff. Copies of progress reports in applicable languages are kept on file to ensure timely provision of documents to parents. Online translation programs will be used to translate languages that our school personnel does not speak and we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". Are printed from STARS classroom in parents indicated language or will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". Translated by school staff. Online translation programs will be used to translate languages that our school personnel does not speak and we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". 2018-19 CEP 65  Brochures/Flyers Weekly/Monthly Translated by school staff. Online translation programs will be used to translate languages that our school personnel does not speak and we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Orientations September and on-going as needed Meet the teacher night September Parent Teacher Conferences November, March Parent Engagement Tuesdays interpretation service(s)? School staff, translation specialists,DOE Vendor Big Word Translations and over the phone interpretation service. School staff, translation specialists,DOE Vendor Big Word Translations and over the phone interpretation service. School staff, translation specialists, DOE Vendor Big Word Translations and over the phone interpretation service. School staff, translation specialists, DOE Vendor Big Word Translations and over the phone interpretation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize School Messenger to inform families of school events and to inform families in the event of a school emergency. If we need to reach an individual parent, school staff is used for translation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are made aware of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through professional development facilitated by the schools ENL teachers. Teachers are provided with a list of translation services. Translation specialists are available 2018-19 CEP 66  to attend parent meetings, workshops and conferences on an as needed basis. Staff members are made aware of language access resources through professional development provided by the school's ENL teachers. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Interpreters will be hired to translate for all conferences and meetings as needed. If we do not have school personal that speaks a language needed we will use DOE Vendors such as Big World for translation services and will use the over the phone interpretation service. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Primary language usage findings are determined by the language report. During parent workshops, the parent coordinator translates all information to the parent community when necessary. Parents will receive a survey, in their preferred language, in order to gather feedback on language services. 2018-19 CEP 67 
