2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q104 School Name: P.S. 104 THE BAYS WATER Principal: KATHLEEN GRADY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 104 The Bayswater School 27Q104 342700010104 Pre-K, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, SE 2601 Mott Avenue 718-327-1910 School Number (DBN): 718-337-2146 Phone Number: Kathleen Grady Fax: KGrady@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kathleen Grady John Nolan Virginia Olivo Diana Easteadt Helen Montero NA NA District Information Geographical District: 27 Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642- 5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Ozone Park, NY Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: (718) 348-2994 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kathleen Grady John Nolan Virginia Olivo Flor Gonzalez NA NA NA Diana Easteadt Anika Aiken *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mia Schual Judith Pacheco Yenifer Garcia Amparo Sanchez NA NA NA NA NA NA Teacher Parent/ Parent/ Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission is that families, staff and community will collaboratively nurture the growth of the PS 104Q child academically, socially and emotionally. We will achieve and maintain high standards in all we do. As a family, we will encourage our children to envision and then reach their goals. Through caring about themselves, each other and their neighborhood, our students will become self-reliant, committed citizens of the 21st Century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 104Q is located at the remote eastern end of the Rockaway peninsula in Queens. Our original school building is more than seventy-five years old; with a “modern” addition that was built in 1966. The building is well kept and in good physical condition. Our school grounds encompass two playgrounds, a large schoolyard enclosing basketball courts, baseball diamond, two handball courts and our PS 104Q vegetable garden. Our school services children on Grades Pre-K-5 inclusive of special education and English as New Language Learners. Our current population of 630 students has a representation of 47.2% Black, 42.9% Hispanic, 4.2% White, 4.1% Asian and 1.5% American Indian or Alaska Native with 53.4% being male and 46.6% female. Within our populations, 18% are Students With Disabilities and 13.9% English as a New Language Learners. Year to date, we have maintained a 91.9% attendance rate. Our community’s poverty level was last measured in 2008 with 80% of our students eligible to receive free lunch. PS 104Q is a designated Title I Universal School Meals school since 2008 which means that all of our students eat breakfast and lunch for free. Our parent coordinator and PTA work closely with our families to ensure the best possible education for all students. PS 104Q has numerous partnerships with a variety of community based organizations that bring exceptional programs to our children both during the day and after school. Our partnerships include:  Sheltering Arms Safespace After School: This local, community based program services our students after school Monday-Friday till 5:00 pm. Activities include homework help, art, dance, athletics etc. Safespace also provides PS 104Q families counseling and social work services where applicable. Safespace has an outreach worker housed in our building.  Rockaway Waterfront Alliance: Through this program, PS 104Q works closely with the alliance on the specific environmental needs of the Rockaway Peninsula including beach cleanups, Billion Oysters Project in Jamaica Bay and Gateway National Park rangers visiting classrooms to instruct students on environmental concerns.  NYC Parks Department Swim for Life Program: Grade 2 students attend swimming classes at Flushing Meadows Park Aquatic Center. This program teaches children water safety and how to swim.  Queens District Attorney’s Star Track Program: For the past 20 years, PS 104Q has worked with the Queens DA’s office to promote an anti-violence message among our youth with a focus on Grade 5. Representatives from the DA's office come in every other week to provide instruction in the Grade 5 classrooms on a variety of topics to promote peaceful interaction among our students. This initiative also entails schools networking with community organizations through the Queens DA’s office. Grade 5 classes attend the Queens County Courthouse to observe the law in action and additionally prepare a mock trial. Our culminating activities include “Say No to Violence Week” and the Tennis Event at Arthur Ashe Stadium. School Wellness Council: This NYCDOE wellness grant serves as the umbrella for all of our health/wellness initiatives including our annual Community Health Fair, Achilles Kids, Swim for Life and our “walk-a-thon” initiative;   Thrive NYC: As one of ten select schools in District 27, this initiative provides a networking opportunity that supports PS 104Q connecting with outside resources to support the mental, emotional and physical growth of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11   our students and families. As a Department of Health partnership, the Thrive coordinator connects PS 104Q with the resources in the area. The Thrive coordinator for the ten District 27 schools is housed at PS 104Q. St. John's Hospital: PS 104Q partners with St. John's Hospital to bring health and wellness information to our families. At every large event that was held, St. John's Hospital came out to support our work and set up information tables. Through their efforts, parents are signing up for health insurance and seeking health care through the St. John's system.  NYCDOE Office of Adult Education: PS 104Q is proud to host adult continuing education classes in English as a New Language and classes to prepare for General Equivalency Diploma exam. We have three ENL classes at the beginner, intermediate and advanced levels. We host one GED class.  PS 104Q Environmental, Service Learning Initiative: As part of our commitment to foster community minded students, our school has invested in an environmental service learning teacher. Our earliest learner work with this teacher in our school fruit and vegetable garden, butterfly garden, daffodil garden and our 104Q beach scene. Our upper grade students work with this same teacher on beach clean ups, food collection for the needy, volunteer service at a local food pantry etc. P.S. 104 also grounds much of its work in a collaborative decision making process that takes into account the ideas and opinions of all its constituents. These constituent groups include the School Leadership Team, Parent Teachers Association, Learning Leaders, Student Council, Grade Level Common Planning, Vertical Planning Teams, and the quarterly Principal's Breakfast with parents. Each of these forums is used to promote shared discussions as we focus on the instructional and social-emotional goals of our school. Continued areas of focus for the 2018-2019 year include:    Improvement in student ownership and facility in writing via a writing process model grounded in genre focused units of study. Improvement in student engagement to promote higher order, independent thinking most specifically in mathematics via the "math path" strategy. Strengthen teacher use of assessments to inform and tailor instruction for individual students including the systematic use of "checks for understanding." Increased focus on employing data to inform instruction via Harvard University's DATAWISE team approach.   Targeted academic intervention services (AIS) strategically employed to support student growth in literacy   and mathematics. Focused parent engagement and learning opportunities to promote family involvement in supporting their child's academic growth at home. Focused learning opportunities for parents to enhance their own skills through GED (General Equivalency Diploma) and English as a New Language classes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 104Q is home to many diverse student populations including English as New Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our ENL population accounts for 13.93% whereas our students with disabilities population is 18.43%. Of our ENL's, 40% of this population are on the entering-emerging levels of English Language acquisition and 60% are either transitioning, expanding or commanding. 51.18% of our students with disabilities populations are in self contained 12:1:1 classes and 33.86% are in integrated co-teaching classes. In addition to these populations, PS 104Q also serves a number of students who are in temporary housing situations. Approximately 10% of our students are living in temporary housing situations including ten students in the shelter system, 10 students in foster care and approximately 48 students living in doubled up situations. These students and families require additional supports that include providing free classroom supplies, free uniforms, additional support for attendance and lateness and generally academic interventions due to the instability of the family living situation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In light of the Framework for Great Schools, the strengths of the PS 104Q family are numerous. Our supportive environment is very warm, welcoming and safe. Trust abounds in our school as noted in the 17-18 School Quality report. Our staff is extremely competent and caring. We promote the education of the whole child. We are very strong in "family and community ties" in that families are regularly in and out of the building attending special events including school-wide, grade and individual class celebrations. Some of these celebrations include Turkey Trot, Reindeer Run, Attendance Assembly, Student of the Month, Student Appreciation, Candy Sale Ice Cream Party with the Principal, Honor Roll, Honor Roll Assembly, Middle School Information Night, Bring Your Dad to School, Mommy & Me Tea, Character Book Day, Hispanic Heritage Assembly and Black History Month to name a few. Key elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS 104Q made the most growth are "collaborative teaching" and "effective leadership." Our professional learning team initiative has been in place for the past nine years and has immensely impacted the culture of our school. Teachers take ownership of an entire grade as opposed to a single class. Ideas are regularly shared vertically and horizontally. Teachers work together using Harvard University Datawise approach to drill down into data so that teachers can shift instruction to meet the needs of students. As noted in one Principal Performance observation, PS 104Q was celebrated in the area of distributed leadership which "...is deeply rooted in the school's day to day operations and a variety of teachers serve as a conduit for staff input in strategic decisions that affect student achievement." Another strength aligned with the Framework for Great Schools is in "rigorous instruction." In the 2017-2018 Quality Review, PS 104Q was rated well developed in the area of curriculum. This trend is the foundation for our instructional focus on assessing higher order thinking. Higher order thinking strategies are interwoven across all content areas through accountable talk/discussion, vocabulary development, writing to learn strategies and the "my math path" tool. We aim to foster higher level thinking with a strong language foundation as its core. This philosophy is evident in all we do. As noted in a recent walk through of the school, the reviewer wrote, "Curricula and tasks, across grades and subjects, challenge and engage students, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners, through scaffolding and critical thinking. Student work demonstrates evidence of extended thinking and work over time. Teachers across grades and subjects use student work and data to plan and refine curricula and academic tasks to meet the needs of all learners." The element of the Framework for Great Schools which will be the key focus for this coming school year is as follows: Instructional Focus: Higher Order Thinking Strategies for Improving Mathematics - The PS 104Q school community will work as a team to improve student capacity with higher order thinking in mathematics through the use of the "my math path" tool and other metacognitive strategies that will be implemented across Grades K-5. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q104 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 689 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 84 84 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 78.2% % Reduced Lunch 13.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 45.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.08 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 67 28 91.5% 1.2% 19.4% 45.6% 3.0% 1.5% 2 10% 6.5 39.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. We analyzed the Principal Performance Observations (PPO), Elementary School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Benchmark Assessments, English Language Arts and Mathematics State testing data, and NYSESLAT results to identify our school’s strengths and challenges. As a result of this analysis, we developed a mathematics focus to help strengthen all learners in our school. Strengths: The key data points below highlight some of our strengths that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018  Curricula and tasks, across grades and subjects, challenge and engage students, including students with disabilities and English language learners, through scaffolding and critical thinking. Student work demonstrates 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  evidence of extended thinking and work over time. Teachers across grades and subjects use student work and data to plan and refine curricula and academic tasks to meet the needs of all learners. (Tenet 3.2) Quality Review 2017-2018 1.1 Curriculum - Well Developed, 2.2 Assessment - Proficient  All curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and strategically incorporate key instructional shifts, most notably writing across the curricula. Rigorous habits and higher-order skills for all students are emphasized in the school’s curricula and academic tasks. (Tenet 3.2)  Rigorous tasks and access for all students result in students being able to demonstrate their high levels of thinking and cognitive engagement, as well as college and career readiness. (Tenet 3.3)  Across classrooms, teachers create and use rubrics and assessments that are aligned to the school’s curricula. Teachers’ assessment practices include consistent on-going checks for understanding, including student self-assessment. (Tenet 3.5)  Teachers provide students with feedback that is actionable and specific to their tasks. Teachers take data collected throughout lessons and make adjustments to meet the needs of all learners. (Tenet 3.5) New York City School Quality Snapshot 2017-2018  100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resources to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. (Q17a) (Tenet 3.2)  100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resource to link the standards from previous grades to current grade so student knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts. (Q17b) (Tenet 3.4)  100% of math/science teachers say that they had the resources to develop students’ conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context. (Q17c) (Tenet 3.3) Needs: The key data points below highlight some areas for improvement that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: NYCDOE June Instructional Report 2017-2018  Current June Instructional report data indicate that PS 104Q is in process of closing the achievement gap between our school and other NYCDOE schools. On average, our school scored -.05 off the city average in 17-18 as compared to an average-.13 in 16-17. (Tenet 3.5) New York State Mathematics Assessment Performance Data 2017-2018  Data gleaned from the NYS Mathematics exam from 2017-2018 Indicate that our school increased by 21% on Levels 3 and 4 from the 2016-2017 to the 2017-2018 results. (Tenet 3.5)  When comparing the same students from Grade 3 to Grade 4 (2016-2017 to the 2017-2018 exams), there was a 16% increase of Levels 3 and 4 and a 10% decrease to Level 1.  When comparing the same students from Grade 4 to Grade 5 (2016-2017 to the 2017-2018 exams), there was a 20% increase on Levels 3 and 4 and a 12% decrease in Level 1s.  This data indicates that the implementation of the "my math path" strategy has helped our students across all grades with multi-step word problems. Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018  Teachers are not yet consistently monitoring student understanding during instruction that would assist them in collecting information about individual students and identify trends to inform instruction. Continue to work with teacher teams to develop strategies and protocols for tracking check for understanding throughout the lesson 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  so that teachers can make on the spot adjustments and grouping decisions based on student needs and mastery. Teacher teams can develop additional self-reflection opportunities which will allow students to further internalize their next steps and goals for growth.(Tenet 3.5) Quality Review 2017-2018  Revisit learning targets to ensure student access and alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. Learning targets should include what students should know and be able to do at the end for the lesson. Teachers should refer to the learning target throughout instruction to check for understanding (Tenet 3.5) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will align assessments to curricula, analyze assessments, and adjust instruction toward achieving Math Common Core Learning Standards, to improve student progress, as measured by a 5% average increase from the 2018-2019 BOY (beginning of year) school generated assessment to the 2018-2019 end of year (EOY) school generated assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). GO MATH Teachers will provide mathematics instruction via the Go Math program to all students including ENLs (English as a New Language) and SWDs (students with disabilities) following the workshop model of "to, with and by." (Tenet 3.3) All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs THINK CENTRAL Teachers will engage students via intervention strategies as provided by the Go Math program with a focus on Think Central (computer assisted instruction) that can be used in the classroom and at home. A family workshop will be provided on how to use Think Central at home. (Tenet 3.2) DEDICATED MATH BLOCKS Teachers will provide small group instruction during the 106 minute math block to focus on addressing the learning gaps in mathematics. These fluid groups will be formed based on formative assessments and informal checks for understanding. (Tenet 3.5) All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs who require enrichment, grade level instruction and intervention. All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs and who require enrichment, grade level instruction and intervention. Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, classroom teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers September, 2018 - June 2019 Different chapters every month September, 2018 - June 2019 Different chapters every month September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily Assessment Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers Mathematics Vocabulary Instruction: Teachers will engage students on a daily basis in “explicit vocabulary instruction” across all grades and classrooms. This instruction is designed to promote student facility with mathematical, content vocabulary usage. Our emphasis for the 18-19 school year is on acquisition and application of mathematics, academic vocabulary to promote higher order thinking. The Frayer vocabulary model will be employed as a pre and post assessment to measure student math facility with vocabulary. (Tenet 3.5) All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily basis Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Imagine Math: As part of our efforts to help families support students, PS 104Q will implement the online program entitled "Imagine Math." This online program will be used both in school and at home. School usage is tailored to the student and can serve as an intervention, on grade support or enrichment. Workshops will be given to families on how to use the tool. When using "Imagine Math" at home, students can access a live teacher either in English or in Spanish from home. This feature will assist both students and families in understanding the CCLS math and the techniques to be successful. (Tenet 3,2, 3.3) Big Brainz is an online math automaticity tool for increasing student facility and speed with various mathematical operations. Via a gaming format, students have access to this program both in school and at home. (Tenet 3.2, 3.4) MOBY MAX: This computer assisted instruction program focuses on reading in the content area via math, science, language arts and social studies. This program is primarily used for homework and is accessible to students who have a computer or tablet at home. (Tenet 3.2, 3.4) INFORMAL ASSESSMENTS: In light of feedback from a number of reviewers over the past two years, the PS 104Q staff will focus on improving teacher facility in implementing informal assessments, regular checks for understanding during instruction, student friendly rubrics and student-peer checklists. By regularly assessing student work before, during and after the lesson, teachers can better plan to meet students needs. (Tenet 3.5) DATAWISE (Periodic Data Analysis) Using the Datawise method from Harvard University, all teacher teams will continue to work in the Datawise protocols to analyze data for instructional purposes. Teacher Teams will collaborate weekly to analyze student assessments and the resulting data. This analysis will drive instruction to meet the needs of students, with a focus on students identified as the lowest third, SWD, and ENLs. Our focus for the 18-19 school year will be on mathematics. Administration will regularly monitor all data on a quarterly basis (October, January, March, June) to track for patterns, trends and student progress. Administration will revise practices and policies as needed. (Tenet 3.2 and 3.5) All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs who require enrichment, grade level instruction and intervention. Imagine Math workshops open to all parents All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs who require enrichment, grade level instruction and intervention. All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs who require enrichment, grade level instruction and intervention. All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily basis Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers, parent coordinator September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily basis Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers, Parent coordinator September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily basis Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily Basis Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom teachers All horizontal teacher teams September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom and cluster teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  PROFESSIONAL LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES (PLOS) Strategically selected teachers will attend professional learning opportunities provided by the Queens South Borough Field Support Office and other vendors. Some of the topics of the PLOs will be: All students in PreK-5 including ENLs and SWDs September, 2018 - June 2019 weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom and cluster teachers o Implementing the NGLS instructional shifts o Student engagement with a focus on mathematics o Data analysis to refine curriculum using our Go Math assessments o Standards for Mathematics Practices The information and strategies will be turn-keyed to colleagues during Monday PLO time. (Tenet 3.4) SUPERVISORY OBSERVATION PROCESS As part of school-wide improvement efforts, administration will observe all staff using the Danielson Framework as outlined in ADVANCE. Our school-wide focus for Danielson is based on promoting assessment as a tool to drive instruction. Administration will focus on tracking teacher implementation of supervisory feedback(tenet 3.2, 3.4, 3.5) Learning walks: Supervisory staff will conduct a minimum of four learning walks per semester to assess school wide progress in all areas of the Framework for Great Schools. Resulting soft data will be used to further refine our instructional efforts via professional learning and family outreach. (Tenet 3.2, 3.3, 3.4) All students in K-5 including ENLs and SWDs September, 2018 - June 2019 6 week cycles of learning Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, all classroom and cluster teachers All K-5 teachers and paraprofessionals 8 minimum per year Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders FAMILY WORKSHOPS Select teachers will facilitate family workshops with a focus on the Math NGLS, mathematics best practices and specific strategies used in grade bands (K-2, 3-5). All families Students and families September, 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers, Parent Coordinator September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, instructional leaders 2x a month Students and families September, 2018 - June 2019 4x a year Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, instructional leaders, all teachers PARENT ENGAGEMENT In order to foster trust between all school constituents and improve parent involvement, all parents and teachers will participate in Curriculum Night in early September. This is a family’s opportunity to learn about what their child will learn during the school year. Our focus will be on eliciting information from families regarding their child’s interests and learning needs. In addition to Curriculum Night, PS 104Q will host a number of parent/teacher nights for the express purpose of sharing individual student progress and information. GRADE LEADERS: Distributed leadership across grades and classrooms is deeply embedded into the PS 104Q structures and systems. There are a total of seven (7) grade leaders inclusive of PreK-5. Grade leaders are responsible for serving as the grade liaison to administration, coordinating school-wide initiatives on the grade and are responsible for contributing ideas to improve 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  systems, structures and instruction. Additionally, grade leaders serve as the leaders for vertical teams and are responsible for moving the mission of the team forward so that goals are reached in the areas of literacy and math data, pupil personnel, special education implementation, Principal's cabinet, and professional learning. Vertical Professional Learning Teams to Enhance Mathematics Content Knowledge of all Pedagogues: Teacher Teams Sept November March May September 2018 to June 2019 Vertical teams collaborate on deconstructing open ended math problems and constructive response questions from prior state exams, upside down teaching to allow for students productive struggle, analyzing data from summative exams and participating in webinars and presentations to analyze high leverage strategies to implement in the k-5 math classroom. Achieve the Core: PS 104 classroom teachers will collaborate as a grade to analyze the Go Math program and integrate outside resources to further support student acquisition of higher order thinking strategies in mathematics. Achieve the Core is a specific document that was created to serve as a guide for how to work in the Go Math program in light of the CCLS and incoming NGLS (Next generation Learning Standards) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All classroom teachers Summer, 2018 PLO Mondays 2018-2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Instructional Leaders, Classroom Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Support personnel from the Queens South FSC How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 104Q will engage families in order to support their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core Learning standards by providing the following workshops and resources for: Family Math Night: This event will take place in October and will be run by the parent coordinator. Select teachers will provide learning opportunities for our families. Imagine Math: this online program was specifically purchased so that students and parents can access the support of a live teacher in either English or Spanish from home. An orientation on how to use this program will be included in Family Math Night. Parent coordinator will organize the event. A select teacher will provide the learning opportunity to the families. Math Vocabulary: As an extension of Family Math Night, PS 104Q will host a series of workshops both during the day and in the evening to support parents in helping their children acquire academic language specific to mathematics. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  The parent coordinator will organize this event for November. One teacher per grade band (K-2 and 3-5) will provide learning opportunities for our families on how to develop mathematical, academic vocabulary. Monthly workshops for parents with a focus on mathematics: Once a month, a math workshop will be held at PS 104Q during Tuesday Parent Engagement time. These workshops will be delivered by the select grade's team of teachers. **Key Members-Principal, Assistant Principal, PTA, Parent Coordinator, Teachers and school personnel Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to be used include the following personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal, instructional leaders, teachers, School Aides and Parent Coordinator. Galaxy funding of TL FSF and Title I SWP will cover the costs of personnel for this goal. Per diem will be set aside for teachers to attend "mathematics" professional learning offered by the Field Support Office. All math resources will be purchased through NYSTL funding and tax levy. Parent involvement via mathematics workshops will be paid for out of Title I Focus parent involvement money. Teachers and administrators will receive per session for any family workshops that take place out of regular school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, classroom teachers will align assessments to curricula, analyze assessments, and adjust instruction toward achieving Math Common Core Learning Standards, to improve student progress, as measured by a 2% average increase from the 2018-2019 BOY (beginning of year) school generated assessment to the 2018-2019 middle of year (MOY) school generated assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The measurement tool that will be used for assessing student progress in mathematics will be a school generated 2018 beginning of the year (BOY) assessment as compared to the school generated 2019 middle of the year (MOY) assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. We analyzed the Principal Performance Observations (PPO), Elementary School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Benchmark Assessments, English Language Arts and Mathematics State testing data, and NYSESLAT results to identify our school’s strengths and challenges. Strengths: The key data points below highlight some of the impact of our strengths that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018  The principal and her staff continue to work together to create a warm, welcoming and supportive environment that supports student acquisition of positive academic and personal behaviors. (Tenet 5.3). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24   The principal collaborates with teachers, students and families to develop a vision of how to best support the social-emotional development of students within the classrooms and the school at large. (Tenet 5.5). New York City School Quality Snapshot 2017-2018  98% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. (Q21a) (Tenet 5.4).  96% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the organizational skills needed to be prepared for their next level. (Q21e) (Tenet 5.4)  98% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). (Q21g)(Tenet 5.5) Needs: The key data points below highlight some areas for improvement that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: Quality Review 2017-2018  During our 2017-2018 QR, the reviewer noted that not all teachers can articulate the PS 104Q "theory of action" on how students learn best. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, PS 104Q will continue its social and emotional initiatives to foster a strong sense of community in our students as measured by a 5% reduction in Level 3-5 infractions evidenced by the 2018-2019 Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) summary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS): Also known as SAIL, students receive instruction and guidance on a daily basis in “Showing Self Control, Acting Kindly, Independently Following Directions and Live Respectfully and Being Responsible.” Through this program, students are recognized for positive behavior and that behavior is reinforced via reward on the individual and class levels through a ticket system. This program promotes peaceful resolution of conflicts and supports sustainable change in behavior. (Tenet 5.3) All Students September, 2018 - June, 2019 Daily Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Supervising School Aide, School Aides and all school personnel Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Supervising School Aide, School Aides,, all school personnel Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals Tier 4 PBIS student recidivists September, 2018 - June, 2019 Daily PBIS Check in/Check Out: This is a system in place for students who struggle with behavior. This PBIS Check In/Check Out is when a student reports to a staff member in the morning to determine behavior and academic goals for the day. At the end of the day the student reports back to the staff member with his or her daily behavior/academic log. Staff member and student discuss if the behavior and academic goal was met for the day. This system promotes positive behavior on a 1:1 ratio. This system has had positive effects on students. Students foster and build positive relationships with the staff at Public School 104. (Tenet 5.3) Citizenship in the Digital Age - Cyberbullying: Under the direction of the NYCDOE, PS 104Q has elected to participate in the Citizenship in the Digital Age: Cyberbullying program. All students receive instruction on appropriate online behaviors and how to safeguard themselves when confronted with cyber bullying challenges. Parental workshops are also given as a complement to the student instruction. (Tenet 5.2) All Students and parents Series of lessons that take place across multiple weeks in January and February September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily Lions' Quest: This program promotes positive character traits and positive behavior. Classroom teachers we given the curriculum and were required to teach lessons on a daily basis. Students will be engaged in these lessons, encouraged to role play and promote positive behavior during school and in their community. PS 104Q was selected by the Lions' Club of NY to pilot this program school-All Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  wide. As a result, we have formed a strong partnership with the Lions' Club of NY. (Tenet 5.2, 5.3, 5.4) Calming Corners: This system allows for students who are in crisis to go to a corner in their classroom to calm down. In this corner there is equipment/materials so that students can self manage and self regulate their own behavior and emotions. For example, students tend to use stress balls to relax. These Calming Corners are researched based and grew from collaborative initiative between the District 27 OT/PT office and PS 104Q. (Tenet 5.2, 5.5) Guidance Approach to Behavioral Interventions: At Risk Counseling with a focus on students who are struggling in behavior. Our Guidance Counselors meet with groups of students to discuss and role play to promote positive behavior at school and in their community. Student groups are encouraged to give advice in how to be proactive rather than reactive. (Tenet 5.2, 5.4) Community Service: This program is to keep students safe during their lunch period. Some students face sensory issues in large, group settings. Therefore, students serve as "handy helpers" in a lower grade setting. Students report to the classroom/teacher they are assigned to and assist students. For example, the "handy helper" can tutor a small group or help the teacher file student work. Each community service helper receives a special award for their volunteer service to our school. (Tenet 5.2, 5.4) SWD classrooms and all classrooms that have a student who requires additional support in self regulation of emotions. All students who requires additional support in self regulation of emotions and/or socialization skills All Students Peer Tutoring Program: This program was geared for our low level students in Grade 5. Students were selected by classroom teacher and Guidance Counselors. Students received 1:1 tutoring with a 7th grade student from the Village Academy Middle School. (Tenet 5.2, 5.4) Grade 5 Students All Parents Parent Partnership: In order for our social-emotional learning initiatives to be successful, PS 104Q will host a number of outreach meetings regarding student social-emotional learning over the course of the year. Information regarding this plan will be disseminated at PTA meetings, at Open School Night and through newsletters. For those families who require additional supports, our social-emotional team will work with outside agencies to secure this support for our families. (Tenet 5.2, 5.4) Thrive NYC: As one of ten select schools in District 27, this initiative provides a networking opportunity that supports PS 104Q connecting with outside resources to support the mental, emotional and physical growth of our students and families. As a Department September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, OT Department September, 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers and all School Assessment Team personnel September, 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Supervising School Aide, School Aides September 2018-June 2019 Monthly September, 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Principals, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Classroom Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, teachers Entire School Community September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  of Health partnership, the Thrive coordinator connects PS 104Q with the resources in the area. The Thrive coordinator for the ten District 27 schools is housed at PS 104Q. (Tenet 5.4 and 5.5) Sheltering Arms Safespace After school Program: This local, community based program services our students after school Monday-Friday till 6:00 pm. Activities include homework help, art, dance, athletics etc. Safespace also provides PS 104Q families counseling and social work services where applicable. Safespace has an outreach worker housed in our building. Grade 5 Queens District Attorney Star Track Program: For the past 20 years, PS 104Q has worked with the Queens DA’s office to promote an anti-violence message among our youth with a focus on Grade 5. Representatives from the DA's office come in every other week to provide instruction in the Grade 5 classrooms on a variety of topics to promote peaceful interaction among our students. This initiative also entails schools networking with community organizations through the Queens DA’s office. Grade 5 classes attend the Queens County Courthouse to observe the law in action and additionally prepare a mock trial. Our culminating activities include “Say No to Violence Week” and the Tennis Event at Arthur Ashe Stadium. Rockaway Waterfront Alliance: Through this program, PS 104Q works closely with the alliance on the specific environmental needs of the Rockaway Peninsula including beach cleanups, Millions Mussels Project in Jamaica Bay and Gateway National Park rangers visiting classrooms to instruct students on environmental concerns. Select students chosen via an application process including SWDs and ENLs All Grade 5 students Daily Guidance Counselors, teachers September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, DYCD, Sheltering Arms Director, Sheltering Arms Personnel Daily A series of learning experiences over the course of the school year Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Grade 5 teachers and paraprofessionals Entire School Community A series of learning experiences over the course of the school year Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals NYC Parks Department Swim for Life Program: Grade 2 students attend swimming classes at Far Rockaway High School and Flushing Meadows Park Aquatic Center. This program teaches children water safety and how to swim. All grade 2 students including SWDs and ENLs Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Grade 2 Teachers, Paraprofessionals Ten weeks. Schedule varies based on pool availability at Far Rockaway HS and Flushing Meadow Park Aquatic Center School Wellness Council: This wellness grant serves as the umbrella for all of our health/wellness/social-emotional learning initiatives including our annual Community Health Fair, Achilles Kids, Swim for Life, yoga and our “walk-a-thon” initiative. Entire School Community September - June Members of School Wellness Council including Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Physical Education 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  St. John's Hospital: PS 104Q partners with St. John's Hospital to bring health/wellness/social-emotional learning information to our families. At every large event that is held, St. John's Hospital comes out to support our work and set up information tables. Through their efforts, parents are signing up for health insurance and seeking health care through the St. John's system. Cloud 9: Cloud9World is a unique and innovative social and emotional learning program that integrates literacy as the vehicle for teaching character strengths. Students learn from animal role models exhibiting a positive, inviting tone. The story format delivers a practical view of social-emotional behavior in school, at home and in the community. Direct instruction through literacy, discussion and experimentation inspires students to apply a real-world understanding through role play, decision-making, projects, presentations and everyday life. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Entire School Community September - June Entire School Community September - June Department, Parents, teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. September: 1. Back to School/Meet the Teacher Night: 2. Sheltering Arms Safespace Orientation 3. PBIS Assemblies for Grades K-5: October: 1. Lions' Quest Instruction and Parent Workshop: All teachers and parent coordinator 2. Queens DA Program and Parent Workshop: Grade 5 teachers and Queens DA's office 3. Swim for Life and Parent Orientation: Grade 2 teachers November - January Ongoing parent workshops regarding social-emotional learning including calming corners, School Wellness Council, and the Rockaway Waterfront Alliance ongoing activities: Guidance department and administrative cabinet will implement and oversee. February - June Ongoing parent workshops and information on Cyberbullying, PBIS at home, Community Resources: Parent Coordinator and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to be used include the following personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, School Aides and Parent Coordinator. General School Funds will cover the cost for all individual and class incentives. Galaxy funding of TL FSF and Title I SWP will cover the costs of personnel for this goal and the purchasing of Blackboard Connect for parent outreach. Per diem will be set aside for School Wellness Team members to attend "supportive environment" professional learning offered by the Field Support Office. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, PS 104Q will continue its social and emotional initiatives in order to reduce the number of Level 3-5 infractions by 2% as evidenced in the 2018-2019 Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) summary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PS 104Q will use the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) system as our specific measurement tool. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. We analyzed the Principal Performance Observations (PPO), Elementary School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Benchmark Assessments, English Language Arts and Mathematics State testing data, and NYSESLAT results to identify our school’s strengths and challenges. Strengths: The key data points below highlight some of the impact of our strengths that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31   Instruction, strategies, and learning activities are derived from standards-based curricula and reflect the Principal's beliefs about how students learn best. These beliefs are influenced by the priorities of the Danielson Framework and Common Core instructional shifts. Across most classrooms, teachers strategically use scaffolds, questioning, and opportunities for choice to create a variety of ways for students to access the content and tasks (Tenet 4.2, 4.3)  The use of teacher team time is structured so that the teams meet regularly and engage in structured inquiry to analyze student outcomes with the goal to inform teaching practice and instructional planning (Tenet 4.5). Quality Review 2017-2018 1.2 Pedagogy - Proficient, 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - Well Developed  Across many classrooms, teaching practices are connected to the school’s belief in how students learn best, such as following the workshop model. English Language Arts (ELA) and math lessons are supported so that students produce meaningful work products. (Tenet 4.2)  All teachers are engaged in professional inquiry-based collaborations and actively take part in the school’s distributed leadership practices. (Tenet 4.4)  There is increased instructional capacity and schoolwide instructional coherence. Teacher voice plays an integral part in key decision making that impacts student learning. (Tenet 4.2) New York City School Quality Snapshot 2017-2018  98% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together. (Q8a)  96% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. (Q1c)  100% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. (Q8b)  96% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. (Q8c). Needs: The key data points below highlight some areas for improvement that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018  Math teacher teams are working towards developing Common Core aligned essential questions for each unit and series of "I can" learning targets for each lesson. These strategies are resulting in better coherence across the grades. (Tenet 4.5) Quality Review 2017-2018  Student work products reflect rigor and high levels of thinking and participation but not all work products include student ownership. (Tenet 4.4) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will utilize DATAWISE cycles of inquiry in Math to improve by 5% student facility with constructed responses in mathematics as measured by school generated BOY, MOY and EOY assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Horizontal Teacher Teams September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Leaders, all teachers three times a week September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily School-wide data specialist, grade data specialist, teacher teams, testing coordinator, administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Horizontal Teams: Teachers will work together on two common preparation periods and on Monday Professional Learning time to collaboratively plan lessons, analyze data, revise units of study and work together to meet the academic, social and emotional needs of all students on the grade. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Vertical Team Organization Teacher Teams In order to organize for effort, the PS 104Q administration will enhance our teacher team approach by ensuring that the following constructs for success are in place: a) Program a minimum of two common preps per teacher team in order to provide staff with time during the day to work together. b) Continue our restructuring of Teacher Teams so that every teacher in the building participates on both a horizontal grade team and a vertical school team in the areas of pupil personnel, Principal’s cabinet, math, ENL team, special education, professional learning, and school-wide strategies teams. c) Increase communication among staff by grade representatives bringing back the information from each team meeting to the grade team meeting. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Data Analysis June Instructional Report: Conduct analysis of released questions from State ELA/Math Exams to determine student expectations and implications for instruction when compared to student performance. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) All UFT Staff September, 2018 - June 2019 Professional Learning Mondays and Tuesdays: Each Monday for 80 minutes and on each Tuesday for 35 minutes teachers will participate in vertical and horizontal professional learning opportunities to share/experience best practices, looking at student work, identifying trends via data analysis and modifying instruction. PLOs will last for approximately 1 hour. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Weekly All UFT Staff September, 2018 - June 2019 Vertical Inquiry Teams, All Teachers, Data Specialist, Grade Data Specialists, Administration Professional Learning Team, All Teachers, All paraprofessionals Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Datawise: Using the Data Wise method from Harvard University, all teacher teams will continue to work in the Data Wise approach for instructional purposes protocols. Teacher Teams will collaborate bimonthly to analyze student assessments and the resulting data. This analysis will drive instruction to meet the needs of students, with a focus on students identified as the lowest third, SWD, and ENLs. Datawise will take place during one of the common, planning periods. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Grade Leaders, Grade Data Specialist, Teacher Teams 6 week cycles of learning September, 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Leaders, Grade Data Specialists, Teacher Teams Grade Leaders: Distributed leadership across grades and classrooms is deeply embedded into the PS 104Q structures and systems. There are a total of seven (7) grade leaders inclusive of PreK-5 and one leader for special education. Grade leaders are responsible for serving as the grade liaison to administration, coordinating school-wide initiatives on the grade and are responsible for contributing ideas to improve systems, structures and instruction. Additionally, grade leaders serve as the leaders for vertical teams and are responsible for moving the mission of the team forward so that goals are reached in the areas of literacy and math data, pupil personnel, special education implementation, Principal's cabinet, and professional learning. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Learning Walks: Supervisory staff and instructional leaders will conduct a minimum of four learning walks per semester to assess school wide progress in all areas of the Framework for Great Schools. (Tenet 4.4, 4.5) Mentor-Mentee Interactions: As part of NYS Education Department guidelines, all first year teachers are required to be mentored in order to fulfill license requirements. Each mentee is assigned a mentor that will work with the teacher 1:1 on improving teacher practice, lesson planning, CCLS shifts and any other areas in which the new teacher needs support and assistance. Mentors record interactions into the mentor system so that all hours are accounted. (Tenet 4.2, 4.3) Achieve the Core: PS 104 classroom teachers will collaborate via horizontal teams to analyze the Go Math program and integrate outside resources to further support student acquisition of higher order thinking strategies in mathematics. Achieve the Core is a specific document that was created to serve as a guide for how to work in the Go Math program in light of the CCLS and incoming NGLS (Next Generation Learning Standards) (Tenet 4.4, 4.5) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All classroom teachers September, 2018 - June 2019 Daily basis Principal, Assistant Principals, grade leaders Grade leaders, 8 total per year Principal, Assistant Principals, instructional leaders teacher teams First year teachers Weekly basis Principal, Assistant Principals, mentor teachers September, 2018 - June 2019 All Classroom teachers Summer, 2018 Monday PLOs September-June Principal, Assistant Principals, Support personnel from the Queens South FSC 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  We will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies with Student Led Conferences via a Student Led Conference Information night in September, 2018.  October 2018-January 2019- All teachers will conduct student led conferences. Teachers will reflect, reassess and create next steps to push high level of conversation. February 2019-May 2019-Continue with student led conferences. June 2019- Students, parents and teachers will self reflect, reassess and discuss next steps to improve our student led conferences. Stakeholders: students, parents, all teachers and administration    Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to be used to achieve our goal and implement this action plan include 100% teacher participation with principal and assistant principal support.  Intervention teachers are funded via C4E and SWP and will collaborate with classroom teachers regarding their students who receive intervention services.  A centrally funded tax levy IEP teacher will provide RTI math services to at risk students and will collaborate with the classroom teacher as to individual student progress.  Professional learning opportunities inclusive of student led conferences, ENL strategies training and other professional learning will be funded with per session.  Common preparation periods is funded via tax levy.  Per diem will be used to provide coverage for teachers to attend FSC and in house professional learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will utilize DATAWISE cycles of inquiry in Math to improve by 2% student facility with constructed responses in mathematics as measured by school generated BOY, MOY and EOY assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our measurement for this goal is the use of school generated BOY, MOY and EOY assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. We analyzed the Principal Performance Observations (PPO), Elementary School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Benchmark Assessments, English Language Arts and Mathematics State testing data, and NYSESLAT results to identify our school’s strengths and challenges. Strengths: The key data points below highlight some of the impact of our strengths that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018  Distributed leadership is deeply-rooted in the school's day to day operations and a variety of teachers serve as a conduit for staff input in strategic decisions that affect student achievement (Tenet 2.3).  Teaching assignments are made strategically, based on student needs and the school's instructional priorities. Staffs assigned to AIS/RTI and instructional lead roles have clearly defined goals connected to the instructional priorities of the school. The use of teacher team time is structured so that the teams meet regularly and engage in structured inquiry to analyze student outcomes with the goal to inform teaching practice and instructional planning (Tenet 2.5). Quality Review 2017-2018 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision - Proficient  Teachers are supported by school leaders through effective and specific feedback from frequent classroom observations. Feedback accurately capture classroom events, is actionable and offers clear next steps. (Tenet 2.4). Feedback to teachers articulates clear expectations and helps to elevates schoolwide instructional strategies. (Tenet 2.5)  New York City School Quality Snapshot 2017-2018  95% of parents and families agree that the principal encourage feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders (Tenet 2.2).  94% of teachers agree that the principal at this school is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly (Tenet 2.5). Needs: The key data points below highlight some areas for improvement that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: ADVANCE Evaluation System Data: 2017-2018 ADVANCE data indicates that 78% of our staff were effective in questioning. This data also indicates that 80% were effective in "student engagement" (Tenet 2.4, 2.5). Principal Performance Observations 2017-2018: The reviewer noted that PS 104Q has built a solid foundation for distributed leadership and that we are to continue our efforts in this area to refine our systems and structures to ensure success for all (Tenet 2.5). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will continue its observation initiative by tracking teacher implementation of supervisory feedback with a focus on a 5% increase from developing to effective in 3d: assessment as evidenced by ADVANCE. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, UFT Chapter Chairperson Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Vertical Team Organization All Teachers In order to organize for effort, the PS 104Q administration will continue restructuring our teacher team approach by ensuring that the following constructs for success are in place: a) Program a minimum of one, common prep per teacher team in order to provide staff with time during the day to work together. b) Revisit and revise Teacher Teams so that every teacher in the building participates bimonthly on both a horizontal grade team and a vertical school team. c) Increase communication among staff by grade representatives bringing back the information from each team meeting to the grade team meeting. (Tenet 2.3, 2.5) Principal’s Cabinet: Administration will continue our restructuring of the Principal's cabinet to include one grade leader per grade, a cluster leader, UFT Chapter Chairperson, and administration. Grade Leaders, September, 2018 - June 2019 UFT Chapter Chair, Administration All UFT Staff September, 2018 - June 2019 a) Via these bimonthly meetings held on Tuesday afternoons, the cabinet will address all issues that are pertinent to instruction, student performance, at risk services, material purchasing and all administrative communications. (Tenet 2.2, 2.3, 2.5) Professional Learning Team (PLT): The Professional Learning Team consisting of one grade representative, inclusive of special education and general education teachers, will conduct a September survey. This teacher led team will analyze ADVANCE data in order to provide staff with professional learning opportunities that directly align with teachers’ areas of need. Throughout the year, the PLT will invite every teacher in the building a twice to participate in presenting a professional learning workshop that meets teacher needs. b) Administration will work with the PLT by sharing new information related to teacher professional learning and will offer Grade Leaders, UFT Chapter Chairperson, Administration Professional Learning Team Leader, grade representatives, paraprofessional representatives, administration. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  suggestions for workshop topics. These suggestions will come as a direct result of teacher observation and an analysis of teaching trends across the school. (Tenet 2.2, 2.3, 2.5) Pupil Personnel Team: The Pupil Personnel Team consisting of one grade representative, inclusive of special education and general education teachers, will be led by the PS 104Q guidance department. The K-2 and 3-5 guidance counselors and social worker will meet with the team bimonthly in order to provide the appropriate interventions for our at risk student population. Referring Teachers and at risk students and families September, 2018 - June 2019 Social Worker, guidance department, school psychologist, service providers and grade representatives. 1) Since this forum will take place on Tuesday afternoons, referring teachers will be invited to present a case study at the PPT so that data driven decisions as to specific interventions can be employed. 2) Communication systems will be improved so that all referring teachers are aware of the outcome of the PPT. All communications will be sent via email. (Tenet 2.2, 2.3, 2.5) Special Education and Language Proficiency Implementation Team: This team will consist of one special educator per grade in addition to our ENL teacher. The focus is to analyze IEPs for quality, patterns and trends. In addition, the team will determine if the appropriate services are being given to each child and if a child can be mainstreamed or have a flexible schedule to meet the individual needs of every child with an IEP. (Tenet 2.2, 2.3, 2.5) Vertical Inquiry Teams in ELA and Math: As a result of our team work in 2017-2018, we noted that it is important to separate math from literacy when working with a vertical approach to data analysis. Thus, we will create a vertical team in literacy and another in math employing a "Datawise" approach to working with data. (Tenet 2.2, 2.3, 2.5) Danielson Framework and ADVANCE rating system: Administration will work with staff to coordinate a comprehensive schedule of formal and informal observations with a concerted focus on the areas of "student engagement and questioning/discussion." Verbal and written feedback will be authentic and evidenced based according to the Danielson Framework. Administration will additionally work with staff to provide intervisitations so that staff can see what an "effective" lesson is in both areas to improve instruction for all staff. (Tenet 2.4) Grade Leaders: Distributed leadership across grades and classrooms is deeply embedded into the PS 104Q structures and systems. The role of grade/instructional leader is self assigned by the horizontal team on a rotating basis. The rationale is that all staff are responsible for "leading" their grade and making instructional and organizational improvements. Grade leaders are responsible for serving as the grade liaison to administration, coordinating school-wide initiatives on the grade and are One special educator per grade September, 2018 - June 2019 One teacher per grade September, 2018 - June 2019 All teachers on Grades K-5 September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, IEP Teacher, one special education teacher per grade Vertical Math Team Leader, Vertical ELA Team Leader, grade representatives, paraprofessional representatives, administration. Principal, Assistant Principals All classroom teachers Daily basis September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  responsible for contributing ideas to improve systems, structures and instruction. Additionally, grade leaders serve as the leaders for vertical teams and are responsible for moving the mission of the team forward so that goals are reached in the areas of literacy and math data, pupil personnel, special education implementation, Principal's cabinet, and professional learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September - June: PS 104Q will work with our families to build capacity in parent leadership roles via workshops, information sessions and collaborative activities. Parents will be encouraged and celebrated for participating on the School Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, PTA members, Learning Leaders, School Wellness Council, Language Allocation Policy Team and a host of other leadership roles. this work will be done on a 1:1, small group and large group basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that we will leverage to meet our "effective leadership" goal include per diem, per session, human resources and OTPS (Other than Personnel Services). Instructional leaders on each grade receive one additional period per week as a schedule adjustment for this task. These schedule adjustments are funded via tax levy. Per diem will be used for all teachers participating in professional learning given by either the school or the Field Support Center. Per session is available for after school teacher professional learning including Strategies of Effective Leadership at home and school. We have set aside a per diem allocation to cover teachers to attend on site and off site professional learning on effective leadership.. Prep period coverage allocation to cover teachers for in house professional learning opportunities for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, administration will continue its observation initiative by tracking teacher implementation of supervisory feedback with a focus on a 2% increase from developing to effective in 3d: assessment as evidenced by ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Our instrument of measure will be teacher formal and informal observations in ADVANCE, inter-visitation logs and walk-through checklists to support staff for interim growth in 3D: Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. We analyzed the Principal Performance Observations (PPO), Elementary School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, Benchmark Assessments, English Language Arts and Mathematics State testing data, and NYSESLAT results to identify our school’s strengths and challenges. Strengths: The key data points below highlight some of the impact of our strengths that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: New York City Learning Environment Survey 2017-2018 93% of parents and families agree that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school (Tenet 6.4) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  97% of families agree that PS 104Q communicates with them in a language and in a way that the family can understand (Tenet 6.2). 95% of families agree that the principal encourages feedback from parents and the community through regular meetings with parents and teacher leaders (Tenet 6.3). 96% of families agree that they communicated with their child's teacher about the child's performance (Tenet 6.2). 95% of families agree that teachers work closely with families to meet students' needs (Tenet 6.2). 96% of families agree that the principal works hard to build trusting relationships with families (Tenet 6.2). Quality Review 2017-2018 3.4 High Expectations - Well Developed  A culture for learning exists that consistently supports high expectations among all staff. School leaders and teachers effectively and consistently communicate expectations to families. (Tenent 6.2)  A culture of mutual accountability and a partnership between school staff and parents results in the vast majority of staff and parents taking ownership for schoolwide expectations. (Tenet 6.5) Needs: The key data points below highlight some areas for improvement that were noted by reviewers or evidenced in student achievement: New York City Learning Environment Survey 2017-2018  89% of families agree that they are invited to classrooms to observe instruction (Tenet 6.3).  31% of families want to see stronger enrichment programs (e.g. after school programs, clubs, teams) (Tenet 6.3).  24% of families would like to see a reduction in class size (Tenet 6.5).  76% of families agree that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school (e.g. spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) (Tenet 6.4). PS 104Q Informal Data Regarding Family Attendance at School-wide Events - Workshops 2017-2018 According to the Framework for Great School Report 2017 in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, 97% of our families indicated a positive response when it comes to parent outreach. However, only 89% of families stated that they are involved in their child's school. In reviewing our data gleaned from sign in sheets, we have noted that workshops given before 6:00 pm at night have limited attendance whereas most families are more likely to attend an evening workshop. As a result, we will reconfigure our approach to meeting the needs of our PS 104Q families (Tenet 6.3). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 104Q will have a 3% increase of parents volunteering to take on parent leadership roles at PS 104Q. This increase will be measured and evidenced by comparing the number of parents serving on teams in a leadership capacity in 2017-2018 to 2018-2019 inclusive of workshops, special event days, learning workshops, school teams and general informational meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PTA: the Parent Teacher Association of PS 104Q works diligently to provide information to the families regarding parent involvement, school governance/leadership opportunities, parent-child events. Meetings are hosted monthly with a day time meeting and another in the evening. (Tenet 6.2) School Leadership Team (SLT): the PS 104Q School Leadership Team is comprised of an equal number of parents and school staff. This group is responsible for reviewing current school data in comparison with the school’s CEP goals and making revisions as needed. (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) Parent Communication Parents will receive information on the citywide instructional expectations and all school activities via a school wide monthly calendar, PTA meetings, a “Meet the Teacher Night,” Principal's letters to parents, Blackboard connect, etc. (Tenet 6.2, 6.5) Parents as Leaders to Support Student Growth Provide parents with workshops centered on a variety of topics including:  Common Core Learning Standards  Working with Go Math  Building Literacy in the Home and School  Parents Power Hour/connection to school  Dial a Teacher  And many more… Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September, 2018 - June, 2019 PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator, Principal September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, PTA President, UFT Chapter Chair, SLT Chairperson September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator and PTA. September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA and select teachers All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities Elected members to the SLT inclusive of equal number of staff and parents All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA and select teachers All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA and all teachers September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, all teachers All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities PS 104Q will plan to host more parent workshops that begin at 6:00 pm in order to accommodate their schedules. (Tenet 6.4, 6.5) Parents as Leaders to Support Their Own Growth Provide parents with workshops centered on a variety of topics including:  Common Core Learning Standards  Working with Go Math  Building Literacy in the Home  Parent Stress Workshop  GED for parents  ENL for parents  Cornell Nutrition Program PS 104Q will plan to host more parent workshops that begin at 6:00 pm in order to accommodate their schedules. (Tenet 6.4, 6.5) Parents as Advocates PS 104Q will host a “Meet the Teacher” night in September so that teachers and families can work together in the best interest of the education of the whole child. Class parent initiative for all classes. (Tenet 6.2, 6.4, 6.5) Special Events for Families In order to have families involved in their child’s education, PS 104Q will invite parents to participate in a variety of parent-child activities including: Student Led Conferences   PreK and Kindergarten Orientation sessions  Bring Your Dad to School Day  Mother's Day Tea/Selfie Station  PTA Hispanic Heritage Pot Luck/Thankful Dinner  School Wellness Council Breast Cancer Awareness Walkathon Favorite Book Character Day School Wellness Council Turkey Trot for Food Pantries    Middle school Information Night  Title I Parent Orientation Meeting  Grade Thanksgiving Feasts  Grade 5 Awards Night  Monthly Grade Assemblies  Black History Month Celebrations    Family Movie Night Family Game Night Survey Celebration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48 September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA and select teachers September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA and select teachers All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities And much more… (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) School Wellness Council: Please see pages 8-9 for a description of the activities Zumba Walkathons Swim for Life Program Annual PS 104 Health Fair NYU Dental Van (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) Community Partnerships: Please see pages 8-9 for a description of the partnerships. Safe Space   Rockaway Rising  Queens District Attorney’s Star Track Program  Cornell Nutrition  Child Mind Institute  Office of Adult Education GED and ENL Programs  Rockaway Waterfront Alliance   Queens Public Library  NYC Parks and Recreation Puppet Show/Movie Night  United Methodist Pantry Center   NYPD Community Affairs Office   Councilman Richards Office (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) St. John's Episcopal Hospital Lions’ Club FDNY Family Engagement Trips With our school being geographically isolated from the rest of NYC and a limited transportation infrastructure to the rest of the city, PS 104Q promotes family engagement trips and parent networking by purchasing yellow buses to transport families to activities such as: All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities September, 2018 - June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA Bowling Earth Day a RISE Center Mets games with free tickets supplied by the Queens DAs office And many others (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Parent Educational Trips: In order to educate our parents about the cutting edge trends in education, PS 104Q sponsors parent only trips to conferences and workshops. Such conferences include Earth Day at the RISE Center. (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) Thrive NYC: As one of ten select schools in District 27, this initiative provides a networking opportunity that supports PS 104Q connecting with outside resources to support the mental, emotional and physical growth of our students and families. As a Department of Health partnership, the Thrive coordinator connects PS 104Q with the resources in the area. The Thrive coordinator for the ten District 27 schools is housed at PS 104Q. (Tenet 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5) All families inclusive of English Language Learners and students with disabilities Select students and families who require additional support September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, PTA Service referral on an as needed basis. Principal, Assistant Principals, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, School Assessment Team Monthly revisiting of resources available 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. St John's Episcopal Hospital: Blended Case Management Program, Family Resource Center Sheltering Arms Safe Space Joseph P Addabbo Mental Health Health Clinic  New HorIzon Counseling Center   New York Cares Program    Child Mind Institute  Visiting Nurse Service of New York   The Queens District Attorney Office STAR Track Program  Rockaway Waterfront Alliance Lion's Club of NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources include the principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, PTA, District Family Advocate. Compensatory time with be used by the parent coordinator. Teachers and paraprofessionals will be paid per session for translation as parent events. Per diem will be used for anyone attending professional learning in the area of parent and community involvement. Title I SWP and Title Focus money will be applied to the cost of Learning Leaders, parent workshops, parent learning trips etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, PS 104Q will have a 1% increase of parents volunteering to take on parent leadership roles at PS 104Q. This increase will be measured and evidenced by comparing the number of parents serving on teams in a leadership capacity in 2017-2018 to 2018-2019 inclusive of workshops, special event days, learning workshops, school teams and general informational meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure that will be used are the sign in sheets for school-wide team meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) state assessment shall be considered for AIS. Tools to measure progress: Teacher College Benchmarking,NYS ELAexam, formal and informal classroom assessments, teacher observation Mathematics All students performing below the median scale score between a level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tier I Interventions 120 Minute Literacy Block Differentiated instruction Guided Reading 1:1 conferencing addressing individual student need Imagine Learning Moby Max Tier II Interventions Fundations, Great Leaps, Early Success, Reading Rescue, Saturday Academy, ELA Skills Work, Summer School, Safe Space OST Tutoring Tier I Interventions 90 minutes block, differentiated Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Interventions are delivered in a variety of models including push in, pull out, small group, 1:1, computer assisted instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Interventions are provided during the day and after school a minimum of 2-3x a week. Interventions are delivered in a variety of models including push in, pull out, Interventions are provided during the day and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Science Social Studies 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on grade 3-5 mathematics state assessment shall be considered forAIS. instruction, tiered assignments, remediation and enrichment Harcourt Go Math Tier II Interventions small group, 1:1, computer assisted instruction a minimum of 2-3x a week. Math inventories, baseline assessments, NYS Math exam, Go Math Chapter and Unit assessments, formal and informal assess-ments, teacher observation, All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) state assessment shall be considered forAIS. NYS Science exam, formal and informal classroom assessments, teacher observation All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) state assessment Math Skills work, test preparation, summer school, at risk pull out, Moby Max and Think Central computer assisted instruction, Safe Space OST tutoring after school Tier I Interventions Reading in the Content Area strategies, computer assisted instruction Tier II Interventions Small group instruction, push inor pull out instruction, at risk tutoring, Safe Space OST tutoring after school Interventions are delivered in a variety of models including push in, pull out, small group, 1:1, computer assisted instruction Interventions are provided during the day and after school a minimum of 2-3x a week. Tier I Interventions Reading in the Content Area strategies, computer assisted instruction Tier II Interventions Interventions are delivered in a variety of models including push in, pull out, small group, 1:1, computer assisted instruction Interventions are provided during the day and after school a minimum of 2-3x a week. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) shall be considered forAIS. Formal and informal classroom assessments, teacher observation At risk services are assigned by Pupil Personnel Team recommendations based on various data sources including ATS, OORs, SESIS Small group instruction, push inor pull out instruction, at risk tutoring, Safe Space OST tutoring after school Attendance Attendance Attendance Monitor attendance for all at risk (less than 90%), conduct outreach services, family counseling, attendance teacher visits, referrals to support agencies, attendance team, attendance bulletin board, attendance incentive program Alternative Instruction Suspension Program Superintendent suspension, uninterrupted academic instructional support, counseling, reduced student-teacher ratio, removal to alternative site In School SAVE Suspension Program Uninterrupted academic instructional support, counseling, reduced student-teacher ratio, removal to alternative setting in school 1:1 with family, 1:1 with family by outside agency, home visits, attendance team outreach for targeted students Daily outreach, visits as needed, all on a case by case basis, attendance team meets twice a month Alternative Instruction Suspension Program Alternative Instruction Suspension Program Case by case basis Small group In School SAVE Suspension Program In School SAVE Suspension Program Small group and 1:1 Case by case basis 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Guidance, Social Worker, Psychologist Interventions Small group and 1:1 counseling, ENL support counseling, at risk counseling for students experiencing behavioral, emotional and academic issues that negatively impact learning Conflict Resolution In class lessons re: conflict resolution, small group sessions for resolving conflict and anger management, peer mediation and family outreach Guidance, Social Worker, Psychologist Interventions small group, 1:1, family counseling by an outside agency, mandated counseling services Conflict Resolution Guidance, Social Worker, Psychologist Interventions As need basis whole class, small group, 1:1 Conflict Resolution All classes and on an as need basis 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At this time, we have approximately ten students who are in the shelter system and 59 students who are doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services that we plan to provide include:  Basic Supplies such as uniforms, school supplies and materials.  Guidance interventions will be provided on a case by case basis by our K-2 guidance counselor and Grade 3-5 Social Worker through either small group or 1:1 counseling.  Attendance mentor-mentee matching if the student is at risk for chronic absenteeism.  Behavioral mentor-mentee matching if the child requires additional behavioral supports. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified common branch and Special Education teachers.  The payroll secretary and principal will work closely with Queens South HR Director to ensure that all non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers.  Retention is never an issue at PS 104Q in that we have lost only two teachers in ten years teaching to open market hiring or resignation.  All hired staff are highly qualified. For those staff members who have not yet attained their masters, Title I funds are available for their education to ensure that they remain highly qualified.  Administration, in collaboration with the UFT Chapter Leader, reviews the teacher seniority list in the Spring. In line with UFT contract, teachers complete a "preference sheet" during that same time and are granted one of their three preferences as to grade level. If a teacher is not granted their first choice in any given year, the teacher then receives their first choice the following year. Classes are heterogeneously grouped at PS 104Q. As a result, we follow the NYCDOE guidelines for teacher assignments. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Activity #1 Instructional Expectations in ELA: In September via professional development, all staff will continue to work with the instructional expectations that have been developed over the past few years. The PS 104Q foci that align with these expectations include an ELA focus on reading/analyzing informational texts and then writing an opinion/argument in response in addition to problem solving in mathematics. Administration will ensure that all grades have a minimum of one common planning period in addition to an Inquiry team period and also a professional development period for professional learning communities. The principal in collaboration with staff will continue its system for the creation of a yearly ELA overview that is aligned with content, genre and CCLS on a monthly basis. As an outgrowth of the alignment, PLTs will select the content/genre that best aligns with citywide instructional expectations. The PLT will then create a curriculum map that outlines the required skills for CCLS task completion via mapping backwards from 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  the standards . After professional development on unwrapping the standards, the PLTS will create a rigorous, standard driven task and rubric that is a direct outgrowth of the curriculum map. Staff will then design mini-lessons that will support student learning necessary for task completion. PLTs will then implement the unit of instruction resulting in rigorous tasks. PLTs will then analyze the student work and look to improve strategies and techniques that will further support student learning. Professional Development: PD will be provided on the following topics: citywide instructional expectations, curriculum mapping, unwrapping the standards, task and rubric creation, looking at student work, Danielson Framework for Teaching, questioning and discussion techniques, close reading in addition to other as needed topics. Target Populations: All classroom teachers on Grades K-5. Responsible Staff Members: Principal, Assistant Principal, all K-5 classroom teachers including teachers of SWDs, and Data Specialist. Activity #2 Instructional Expectations in Mathematics: Same as Activity #1 with the focus on mathematics. Grade specific foci are as follows: PreK-K: Operations and Algebraic Thinking; Grades 1-2: Number and Operations in Base Ten; Grade 3: Operations and Algebraic Thinking; Grades 4-5: Number and Operations - Fractions Professional Development: PD will be provided on the following topics: citywide instructional expectations, curriculum mapping, unwrapping the standards, task and rubric creation, task and looking at student work. Target Populations: All classroom teachers on Grades K-5. Responsible Staff Members: Principal, Assistant Principals, all K-5 classroom teachers including teachers of SWDs, and Data Specialist. Activity #3 Reading-Writing Connection Professional Learning: In order to improve student reading facility, PS 104Q will work in a "writing process" model of instruction. Research studies show that writing is essential for building thinking processes which then translate to improvement in reading. Professional learning will take place over the summer centered on creating two units of writing study for each grade K-5. A September institute will take place for one full day before school starts introducing staff to the formalized writing process beginning with seed ideas and moving through drafting, revising and editing. PS 104Q has contracted with a writing staff developer who will work with our teachers in whole school, small group and individual sessions. Individual work will take place in the classroom with the students. Target Populations: All classroom teachers on Grades K-5 Responsible Staff Members: Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Learning Team, All classroom teachers, contracted writing professional developer. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Activity #4 Datawise: Using the Data Wise method from Harvard University, all teacher teams will be trained in the Data Wise looking at data for instructional purposes protocols. Teacher Teams will collaborate bimonthly to analyze student assessments and the resulting data. This analysis will drive instruction to meet the needs of students, with a focus on students identified as the lowest third, SWD, and ENLs. Professional Learning: During the course of the 15-16 school year, a pilot team was trained in Datawise by the District 27 Renewal coach. This team will then turn key this training to other teacher teams during the course of the 16-17 school year. Target Populations: All teachers Grades K-2 Responsible Staff Members: Principal, Assistant Principal, All horizontal and vertical inquiry teams inclusive of all UFT staff Activity #6 Ongoing Paraprofessional Training: Throughout the school year, all PS 104Q paraprofessionals participate in online paraprofessional training via the Master Teacher CTLE training program. Paraprofessionals engage in units of study centered on instruction, working with students, positive reinforcement techniques and a host of other trainings. All workshops can be used for CTLE documentation. In addition to this in school training, select paraprofessionals attend training at the Queens South FSC on de-escalation strategies, working with special needs students and much more. Those paraprofessionals that attend outside training then turn key their training to the paraprofessionals in the building on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. Target Population: All PS 104Q paraprofessionals. Responsible Staff Member: Principal, Assistant Principal in charge of special education, UFT Paraprofessional Representative Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our students transition smoothly from preschool into elementary school due to our already having three Pre-K classes in PS 104Q. For those students who are coming from other preschool sites, our transition services include: 1) Parent involvement activities that include workshops, trips, in school activities; 2) Sharing of records/information from the preschool to PS 104Q; 3) Following up on early intervention services and providing similar services if mandated; 4) Articulation with the local community based organizations that provide services to Pre-K students. 5) “Welcome to PS 104Q Curriculum Night” which is an overview of PS 104’s mission, vision, curriculum; 6) Articulation sessions are held between our local PreK centers and our Kindergarten teachers to align instruction and curriculum so that our students are able to meet the rigors of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As part of the NYSED and NYCDOE ADVANCE evaluation system, UFT and administration select staff members to participate in the Measures of Student Learning Team (MOSL). This team, led by the assistant principal and UFT Chapter Chairperson, meets to discuss the various assessment options that can be used as a basis for teacher performance evaluation. Members serving on the committee then work with their grade teams to determine which assessments the grade is most interested in working with. This feedback is then shared again at a MOSL team meeting so that all voices are heard in the process. The MOSL team then makes recommendations to the principal. The principal then reviews the MOSL teams selections and either approves or disapproves. Teachers additionally have limited choice as to the use of informal assessments within their classrooms. As a whole, the staff selected Teacher College Benchmarking as a school-wide literacy measure and chose Harcourt Go Math monthly assessments also. Professional learning centered on assessment includes workshops on the following: the norming of Teacher College Benchmarking; use of Dropbox for data entry, Go Math assessment review, Fundations assessment review, use of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  checks for understanding; DATAWISE Inquiry Team approach to analyze assessment results in order to make instructional practice changes; and 1:1 conference notes in reading, writing and mathematics. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 328, 458 16, 979 88, 934 plus 26, 884 parent education 61067 12, 366 0 4,028, 649 X X X X X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C, 5D N/A 5A, 5C, 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS104Q, The Bays Water School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS104Q, The Bays Water School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66   hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS104Q, The Bays Water School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67   involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Beginning in January, 2019 and ending in May, 2019, PS104Q will implement a Wednesday and Thursday after school program for all English as a New Language students in grades K - 5 who are on the entering and emerging levels. The ENL program will run 60 minutes per day after the regular schools day ends from 2:20 pm - 3:50 pm. Since this program is operating after dismissal, one supervisor, paid from SWP money, will be on site to coordinate the program on each day and attend to late pick ups. The supervisory hours will be between 3:15 pm and 4:15 pm. A supervisor is required in an after school program in case of any emergencies and to ensure the quality of instruction. Students who are on the transitioning, expanding and commanding levels will receive additional support and services in our inclusive Saturday School program and will be funded through Title I money. Two ENL teachers and one common branch teacher attending school for TESOL certification will provide instruction to three different student groups: K-1, 2-3, 4-5. Though groups are differentiated by grade level, the teacher will further differentiate each group by ENL level of entering and emerging. The Saturday school program will be utilized to prepare each student for the NYSESLAT exam that will be administered in Spring, 2019 in addition to enhancing the child's facility with conversational and academic English. Entering and emerging ENL students on grades 3 - 5 will receive additional support via this program to prepare them for the NYSED ELA and Math exams in addition to the NYSESLAT. Instruction will follow a balanced literacy model with inclusion of phonics instruction, exposure to language through read alouds, vocabulary development and written response to literature. Specific NYSESLAT preparation materials have not yet been selected since we are looking for the best program to fit the needs of our students. The rationale for this program is to move our ENL students who are not keeping pace with their English dominant peers who are attaining levels 3 and 4 on the NYSED exams in ELA and Mathematics. According to the data from the previous 3 years, it is evident that our ENL population makes progress in the areas of listening and speaking components of the NYSESLAT. However, they continue to fall short in the reading and the writing components of the exam. This is due primarily to our ENL students acquiring basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) more easily as compared to the more difficult development of cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale In order to promote academic excellence and quality instruction for our ENL students, the two NYS certified ENL teachers who will be delivering instruction in our Title III after school program will receive training in the below areas. This training for Title III program instructors will be provided by the Queens South FSC throughout the year in addition to all Monday professional learning at our school. Monday professional learning takes place from 2:20 pm - 3:40 pm weekly: 1.) Common Core Learning Standards for ENL Students: Teachers will continue to learn the components and structure of the Common Core Learning Standards, which will help them, create and engage students in academic learning. Teachers will learn how to align tasks, rubrics, and how to evaluate student work. This will positively impact the academic growth of ENL students in that teachers will integrate specific ENL strategies into all curricula areas in order to best meet the needs of this student sub group. 2.) ENL Vertical Teams: This team will allow for our ENL teachers to address the challenges that they are faced daily with ENL students . We will analyze data and create an action plan that will allow the school community to monitor student progress across grade level. This professional team will engage in discussion and reflection around best practices for ENL/SWD. The vertical team will collaborate with teachers to plan and reflect on classroom inter-visitations. This data analysis is at the root of our our academic improvement efforts for ENL students. By analyzing the specific data, one drills down into specific needs. The teacher can then comprehensively address those needs as a result of this work. 3.) Scaffolding Instruction of ENL students: The workshop will cover curriculum in both literacy and content areas. Through the workshop teachers will modify units of study to include language objectives and differentiated tasks based on language proficiency levels. In addition, teachers will add academic vocabulary and discussion protocols that will promote language acquisition in all students. This will support student academic progress because this approach to instruction encompasses multiple entry points and is tailored to the needs of our ENL population. 4.) Ongoing Professional Development: Training will take place during the PS104Q Professional Learning Development Communities which will be held monthly on Monday afternoons . In house trainers will include Ms. Sherette Wright and Ana Rodriguez, TESOL certified staff. We will also share ENL resources and strategies in a collaborative environment. Two classroom teachers will attend MLDI provided by Queens South BFSC. Ana Rodriquez and Sherette Wright will continue to attend EILI training in meeting the needs of ENL students and teachers. 5) All records including agendas and attendance sheets for professional learning will be kept on file in the main office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale The PS 104 Parent Involvement Policy is inclusive of all ENL parents. The academic, social and emotional experience of students will be enhanced as a result of the school’s increased parent participation specifically for those who are ENLs. As required under Title I and Title III, a parent meeting is held before the end of November outlining the PS 104Q Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and the School-Parent Compact. Both documents are distributed in English and in the native language. As a direct outgrowth of the parent involvement policy here at PS 104, our school will continue to implement the position of a full-time Parent Coordinator. The main responsibility of our Parent Coordinator is to promote parent engagement and address parents’ questions and concerns. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and is the primary contact for our Spanish speaking population. She is vital in regards to communication amongst our Spanish speaking families. All parent workshops will be conducted both during the school day and in the evening. Parent engagement activities will be delivered by both the parent coordinator and ENL teachers. Day workshops will take place from 9:00 - 10:00. Evening workshops will begin at 6:30 pm - 7:30 pm. Months are indicated below. Workshops and Training Inclusive of ELL parents and community members are: Pre- Kindergarten - 2nd Grade: 1 Hour - 1 Session Workshops September, 2018 Understanding New York State Learning Standards explains what the Common Core Learning Standards are and the changes in academic expectations for students. October, 2018 Develop Your Reader teaches participants practical ways to encourage a love for language through read-alouds and provides activities to help children practice independent reading, and develop fluency and comprehension. November, 2018 Writing from the Start participant are shown how to help children at the beginning stages of writing to connect oral and written language; teaches participants about the central role literature plays in a young writer's development and provides practice activities that encourage students to write. December, 2018 Develop Your Child's Math Skills explains the role counting, matching, sorting, patterns, and vocabulary play in mathematical development; demystifies addition and subtraction computation methods and introduces math vocabulary and strategies for solving word problems. Grade 3 Grade 5: 1 Hour - 1 Session Workshops September, 2018 Understanding New York State Learning Standards explains what the Common Core Learning Standards are and the changes in academic expectations for students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities October, 2018 Support Your Reader encourages independent reading skills by sharing strategies parents can use with reluctant readers to improve fluency, comprehension and vocabulary. November, 2018 Growing as a Writer explains the steps of the writing process, the writing genres students must know, and gives writing activities for home. November, 2018 Making the Transition to Middle School (4th and 5th grades) informs participants about middle school choices, the middle school environment, and how to adapt to middle school. December, 2018 Math for Today discusses how we can apply mathematical applications to everyday tasks through the practice of word problems. January, 2019 Help Your Child Prepare for the New York State Tests explains the format of tests, explores the types of questions asked, and teaches activities to help children prepare for the tests. PS 104Q will additionally provide: •Support for parents’ understanding of, and participation in instructional initiatives including a Title III meeting (Before November 1st provided by the principal). •Parent literacy development •Support for increased parent participation on the School Leadership Team and subcommittees (year round provided by School Leadership Team, PTA and Parent Coordinator). •Family support resources in the community in the areas of career development, health, social services, etc. (year round provided by the PS 104Q SBST). •Parent Coordinator school based workshops (monthly provided by the Parent Coordinator). •Create and stock a lending library with parenting and intervention materials, learning aids and other resources of interest to parents in multiple languages (year round provided by Parent Coordinator). •Conduct workshops to increase parents understanding of CCLS standards and assessments (year round provided by assistant principals, classroom teachers, intervention specialists). •Provide group sessions for parents as an opportunity to share common experiences, gain emotional support, learn practical parenting and problem solving skills from other members that is inclusive of ENL parents with translation available (Minimum of three four times a year provided by Parent Coordinator). •Continue the circulation of the Parent Coordinator Newsletter/Calendar in English and Spanish (monthly provided by Parent Coordinator). Communication-Notification to Parents All parents will be notified in their native language of all school activities including Title III Parent Engagement activities. Written notices and Global Connect phone calls etc. will be employed in the native language. For all events, we will form a translation team so that all parents will have access to the information that is being disseminated. This translation team will consist of parent volunteers, former PS 104Q students who are interested in community service and various PS 104Q staff members. PS 104Q has additionally purchased translation equipment so that when attending a meeting, the parent can wear a head phone through which the translated content can be heard simultaneously. All records including agendas and attendance sheets for professional learning and parent engagement activities will be kept on file in the PS 104Q main office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Bayswater School Borough Queens School Number 104 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kathleen Grady Coach none ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sherette Wright & Ana Rodrigue Teacher/Subject Area Caitlin Mahoney/Grade 1 Teacher/Subject Area Mary Maiorano AIS Related-Service Provider Angela Mannino/IEP SETSS Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Deirdre McShane Coach none School Counselor Marie Rella & Carolyn Cryan Parent Lisette Martir Parent Coordinator Gilda Quijije Capellan Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Rousse Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 633 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.11% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 3 0 2 0 4 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The benchmarking tool that is used to assess early literacy skills of the PS 104Q ENLs is TCRWP on Grades K-5. We additionally employ the use of beginning of the year inventories in both ELA and Math in addition to "on demand" writing samples. Throughout the year, our ENLs are assessed using TCRWP five times during the following months: September, November, February, March and June MOSL benchmarking. This allows for us to monitor student progress. Each child is tested independently. At the end of the assessment the child is given an independent reading level as well as an instructional reading level. The data allows us to see the next steps of where students need to improve in terms of reading, fluency, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  comprehension. This reading assessment drives our instruction across content areas. It allows us to see different patterns and trends in their fluency along with their comprehension. Having such data gleaned from the running records enable teachers to see areas of strengths/weaknesses and areas that need improvement when concerning basic literacy skills of our ENL students. At this time, our ENL TCRWP indicates that on average our ENL students are scoring on average Level 1.2 (TCWRP) level which includes all levels of ENLs. This data trend informs us that our ENL students are not meeting grade level expectations. Therefore, our ENL instruction must shift dramatically both in the classroom and in the ENL classroom as well. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We are using the EDAT to group students by their ability levels. This allows the teachers to support the students at their entry point in order to make progress in achieving the CCLS. Our teachers additionally work in DATAWISE teacher teams to review the data of all sub groups. As a resulting of these weekly meetings, teachers then tailor instruction to meet the needs of the child. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of the ENL program at P.S. 104 by how children score on the ELA , Math and NYSESLAT exam. We take into consideration all progress made via assessment/data analysis. Assessments that we employ include Teacher College Reading and Writing Project benchmarking, NYCDOE periodic assessments, NYCDOE baseline assessments, Harcourt Go Math unit assessments, teacher informal assessments in addition to others. Each of these assessments generates data/reports that we analyze to track student progress. The results of the assessments determine their reading level from the beginning of September until June. This allows for teachers to see their progress in all areas of reading throughout the school year. We additionally evaluate the ENL program by evaluating the success of the ENL teacher through the NYS Measures of Teacher Practice aligned with the Danielson Teaching framework and the selected Local Measures of Student Learning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our Tier I interventions take place during the school day in the classroom with a host of computer assisted technology programs including Imagine Learning and Imagine Math. On Tier II. we host an after school program for ENL students on Grades 3-5 from November - March on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a total of 3 hours a week. Our K-2 students receive intervention services on Saturday mornings from January - March for 4 hours a session. Our students in need of AIS on Tier III receive the services of an AIS teacher in small group, pull out instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Looking at data not only amongst ENLs in our school but across all grades in the building, we are aware that the RTI framework is something that must be implemented in the regular schedule for our students. In order to better support our ENLs and focus on improving their academics, we use various interventions. Our main focus is to make student success happen on his/her grade level. RTI is a researched based intervention system. When using the following interventions our children seem to grasp concepts better. 1.) Small Group Instruction 2.) Differentiated Instruction 3.) Extra instruction in the Wilson Program (Phonics Program) 4.) Guided/support practice 5.) Use of graphic organizers to help aid in note taking and writing 6.) Hands on learning 7.) Technology/visual learning styles 8.) Use of computer assisted instruction via a $40,000 investment in Imagine Learning and Imagine Math across all grades and sub groups 9.) Use of Fundations as a our phonics approach on Grades K-2 10.) Employment of Explicit Vocabulary Instruction model across content areas 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  11.) Progress monitoring in all core content areas 12.) Employment of the PRIM (pre-referral intervention manual) in both hard copy and intervention software specially when a child is referred to the Pupil Personnel Committee which determines at risk services on Tier 2 and 13.) Use of Go Math "Think Central" as a computer assisted instruction intervention tool. 14.) Use of various scaffolds on Grades 3-5 when working with our balanced literacy model. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Upon reviewing the data for 16-17 NYSITELL, Spanish Lab R and the results of the 15-16 NYSESLAT exam, PS 104Q has 74 ENL students on register as of June 30, 2017. 21 of our students are on the entering level, 19 are emerging, 18 are transitioning, and 16 are expanding. We have zero students at the commanding level. No students are showing as proficient. At this time, we only have school, formative data and the NYSITELL data for 33 of our students due to the NYSESLAT results having not yet been released for the 16-17 school year. Of these 33, 20 are at an entering level, 4 are emerging, 5 are transitioning and 4 are expanding. When comparing the 15-16 NYSESLAT data to the 14-15 NYSESLAT data, the other 41 students showed some growth on the lower grades. Our 17-18 Grade 2 students made progress from the 14-15 NYSESLAT to the 15-16 NYSESLAT. Of the 14 students, 5 moved three levels from entering to expanding. 3 student moved one level from transitioning to expanding. Three students remained the same at the expanding level. Our 17-18 Grade 3 students showed no progress. Of our 15 Grade 3 students, only one student made growth from the 14-15 NYSESLAT to the 15-16 by moving 2 levels from entering to transitioning. Six students remained the same with three remaining at transitioning and three remaining at emerging. Two students showed negative growth by moving from transitioning to emerging. Six other students lost two levels with six students moving backwards from expanding to emerging. Of our six current Grade 3 ENL students who are SWDs, none of them showed progress. Three lost two levels moving from expanding to emerging, two remained the same with one at the transitional level and the other at the emerging level. One SWD ENL student lost one level from expanding to transitioning. Our 17-18 Grade 4 students also showed no progress from the 14-15 to the 15-16 NYSESLAT. Out of the seven Grade 4 students, five remained at the same level with four of them on expanding and one on transitioning. One student made growth from entering to emerging. One student showed negative growth by moving backwards from expanding to transitioning. Our 17-18 Grade 5 students showed slightly better progress with six students showing growth from the 14-15 to the 15-16 NYSESLAT. Of the six, three moved from entering to emerging, two moved from emerging to transitioning, one moved from entering to transitioning. Three students showed negative growth with two moving backwards from expanding to transitioning and one moving from transitioning to emerging. Of these three, two are ENL SWD students. Lastly, four students remained the same with one ENL SWD student remaining at emerging and the other three remaining at expanding. Trends that we noted in reviewing the NYSITELL/Spanish Lab R and the NYSESLAT data are that if the student does not move out of entering/emerging in the lower grades, movement becomes that much more difficult on Grades 3-5. We additionally note that our ENL students with disabilities are making little to no growth and tend to move backwards through the levels as they progress upwards through the grades. As a result of this data, changes are being made to our core instructional program. One initiative across the grades is to have word walls with pictures next to the word to support our ENL students. Another change being made is that we have hired a second ENL teacher so that we can more fully service our students in an integrated setting. Lastly, we have purchased the CALLA handbook for each classroom teacher. Our ENL teachers will provide professional learning in building academic vocabulary on all grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  The structures in place include horizontal grade teams and vertical teams. Horizontal grade teams work as a whole to analyze the data of the grade thereby informing instruction. Our vertical team looks at the data school-wide and makes recommendations to the instructional cabinet for areas in which we may need additional support. Lastly, the principal presents data findings to staff at the beginning of the school year and during the mid-year "State of the School" address. Classroom teachers collect data and monitor ongoing progress using formative assessments, such as Teacher's College Running Records progress monitoring, unit assessments, and performance tasks, to identify at risk students. As with the rest of the school’s population our ELL students are administered baseline assessments to determine whether they are a Tier 1, Tier 2, or Tier 3 RTI student. Classroom Teachers and ENL Teachers then collaborate with instructional team members to analyze data and determine which level of support is needed to ensure academic success for all scholars. Once a determination is made, the instructional plan is devised for each Tier and AIS recommendations are implemented. Addtitionally, a plan is also devised for our entering and emerging students using RTI. nstruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. If the analysis of assessment data reveals that students are below or far below grade level standards, the students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 in order to receive more targeted and intensive academic support, in addition to core instruction.This extra support occurs both in the classroom through small group instruction as well as in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning needs. Assessment of progress monitoring within the RTI program consists of Teacher Teams looking at student work in order to recognize trends and gaps in learning and to modify the instruction to address those learning needs. The formative assessments are in the forms of written assignments, teacher student conferences, and oral presentations. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is delivered in a heterogeneous, ungraded pull out model in addition to our integrated model of push in instruction. In planning for our integrated model, we placed ENL students in one class together so that they could be more easily serviced via the integrated model. For pull out instruction, students are grouped according to proficiency level (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) keeping in mind age appropriate instruction and NYSED regulations for minutes of instruction. Depending on the number of ENL students, ENL pull out instruction is delivered to ungraded ENL groups. For example, PS 104 currently has a Grade 4-5 entering group, emerging/transitioning group and expanding/commanding group. The program model is a freestanding model where students are in their regular class all day and then are pulled for ENL instruction based upon their proficiency level. The literacy program used by the ENL teacher is Balanced Literacy and includes read aloud, shared reading, guided reading etc. The teachers self select materials based upon curricula overviews that are disseminated to them based upon what is being taught in the general education classroom. Ms. Wright and Mrs Rodriguez, ENL teachers, plan instruction aligned with the common core learning standards in all content areas. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. If the analysis of assessment data reveals that students are below or far below grade level standards, the students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 in order to receive more targeted and intensive academic support, in addition to core instruction.This extra support occurs both in the classroom through small group instruction as well as in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning needs. Assessment of progress monitoring within the RTI program consists of Teacher Teams looking at student work in order to recognize trends and gaps in learning and to modify the instruction to address those learning needs. The formative assessments are in the forms of written assignments, teacher student conferences, and oral presentations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? With both our ENL teachers, Sherette Wright and Ana Rodriguez, together, Deirdre McShane, AP, helps create the teachers' program. This is to ensure that all students receive their mandated minutes of instruction. Due to the fact that no parent has opted for any program other than a Freestanding ENL program in the past eleven years, explicit NLA instructional minutes do not apply. ENL/ELA instruction is delivered by the ENL teacher in consultation with the classroom teacher. We additionally use Title III funds to support an ENL after school program that focuses on literacy and math for all grades. The after school Grades 3-5 program runs from November - March for 3 hours a week. Our K-2 ENL program takes place on Saturdays for 4 hours a session and runs from January -March. All entering and emerging ELL students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. All transitioning and expanding ELL students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Commanding ELL students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. During intergrated services, all ELL students receive standards based instruction in order to meet grade level standards. Additionally, students are supported through co-teaching and small group instruction. During standalone instruction homogeneous groups of ELL students receive instruction in order to support English language development in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since we do not have a Transitional Bilingual nor a Dual Language program, delivery of content area instruction in these models is not included in this LAP. Currently content area instruction is delivered both through our regular classroom setting and during ENL instructional periods in English only. All students receive ELA instruction within the balanced literacy setting both in their regular classroom and in pull out instruction. Students participate in read alouds, shared readings, and guided reading. In both the integrated and stand alone settings, Explicit ESL is delivered by the following methodologies and strategies: repetition, facial expressions, gestures, visuals, auditory, and tactile tasks are used. The listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills are also implemented. Instructional materials used to support ENLs include: Fountas and Pinell leveled literacy intervention, Rigby guided reading books, picture books, large type books, non-fiction books, fiction books, books across the content areas, Harcourt Go Math materials books, and a multi-grade/multi genre classroom library. As with literacy instruction, ENLS receive content area instruction primarily from the classroom teacher, but with additional supports provided during the ENL periods. Our curriculum includes Harcourt Go math, balanced literacy approach with the Passport to Social Studies curriculum imbedded, writing and science. All appropriate ENL methodologies for delivering instruction are included with an emphasis on repetition, facial expressions, gestures, visuals, auditory and tactile tasks. In addition, both the ENL teachers and classroom teachers emphasize the difference between BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) and CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). Where BICS is used heavily in our entering/emerging groups, teachers focus much more on CALP in our transitional, expanding and commanding groups due to the fact that making content comprehensible to enrich language development is a top priority for our ENL students. PS 104Q pushes those skills required for higher order thinking tasks in both the native language where applicable and English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that all ENLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, our ENL teachers share native language information with our Testing Coordinators Kathleen Grady, Principal, and Marybeth Maiorano, Testing Coordinator. NYS Math and Science exams are ordered for each child in their native language. Thus on testing days, our students are provided both an 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  english copy of the exam in addition to the native language copy if available. If the language is not available, we contact the Office of Translation Services and contract with them for a native speaker to verbally translate the exam. This occurred in prior years with our Arabic students. Students are additionally given support tools such as iPads with google translator and native language dictionaries/thesauri to assist with assessments throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Due to the diverse needs of ENL students at PS 104Q, we differentiate their instruction based upon grade level, NYSESLAT/LAB-R data and number of years as an ENL. Our plan for differentiation is outlined under 5A-5D. 5A) SIFE students are students with interrupted formal education. Many SIFE students need improvement with basic literacy skills such as phonics. When planning lessons, the ENL teacher targets in on the alphabet, simple words, and visuals to support the ENLs to acquire English Language proficiency. In addition, the ENL teacher incorporates the strategies that encourage the SIFE students to acquire listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. All SIFE students receive the necessary help via our free standing ENL program and integrated model. The instructional plan uses ENL strategies such as exaggerated gestures, repetition, slow speech, visuals and analyzing reading material to make it easier to comprehend. The Rigby reading series as well as other appropriate ENL materials are used. 5B) ENLs in US schools less than three years receive the necessary help in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. Assessments such as the LAB-R, NYSESLAT and school formative exams continually allow us to examine student achievement and progress. Additional help is then given according to individual needs and is differentiated by such. The ENL program, as well as guiding ENLs in acquiring English, also helps to prepare them for the ELA exam. Test taking strategies for reading comprehension are focused upon. The extra guidance in ELA test prep using effective ENL strategies allows for the ENLs to get the instruction they need to help them succeed. 5C) ENLs receiving services for four to six years receive ENL instruction according to their levels on the NYSESLAT and ENL periodic exams. The levels of the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing are analyzed. According to the levels of entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding, students then receive the required necessary attention to help them achieve the skills they may still be lacking via differentiation in the ENL classroom and general education classroom as well. The goal is to help ENLs achieve English Language proficiency in all modalities. Once the ENLs achieve proficiency, they test out of the ENL program and then receive transitional services. 5D) Long term ENLs are those ENLs that have completed six, full years of ENL servicing, receive extra attention basically in reading and writing skills. Having completed so many years in the program, they perform well in listening and speaking. Using the ENL periodic exams and NYSESLAT score, modalities that present challenges to students are those targeted for instruction. We additionally analyze if a learning disability is involved with an ENL child and work with the child using multi-sensory learning and techniques including instructional technology. At times, the second language is used to support concepts and language learning where feasible and necessary. The ENLs are encouraged to acquire English language skills and attain learning standards. The plan for long-term ENLs is to target in on literary areas that need improvement. Instruction is differentiated for all ENLs on the classroom and ENL teacher levels. Teachers drill down on specific needs and create student goals for ENLs centered on those needs. The plan for ENLs identified as having special needs is to consider those needs when planning lessons to teach them more effectively. Giving special education ENLs extra attention helps to increase student achievement. The plan for students who are reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT is to continue to help them focus on areas such as reading and writing. Once the areas are addressed, there should be an increase in proficient students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  5E) For those students who have tested out commanding, we monitor their progress through data analysis of Teacher College benchmarking, NYS exams, informal assessments by teachers etc. Test accommodations for former ENLs are provided as outlined under NYSED guidelines. We additionally offer at risk services and continuing ENL support for these students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENls identified as having special needs require help in acquiring the English language. As with other ENLs, the assessment results of formative exams, TCWRP, the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and Spanish LAB help to determine where special need ENLs require the most support. Ms Wright and Mrs Rodriguez, ENL teachers, in conjunction with Ms. McShane, AP, analyze the data for individual areas of strength and areas for improvement for each ENL SWD child. The data examined include the RNMR (NYSESLAT Modality), the RBPS (BESIS Summary), and RMSRs (in ELA, Math and Science). Through SESIS and via hard copies, , the ENL teachers receive the IEP of each ENL SWD pupil. The teachers review the IEP goals and keeps those individual goals forefront in her planning. Through using the first attend system, the teachers ensure that the first start dates for ENL SWD students are entered into the tracking system. By doing this, one ensures delivery of instruction and mandated services. For those ENL SWDs whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction, we first see if we have enough ENL SWDs across three contiguous grades to form a bilingual special needs class. If not, those students with mandated bilingual IEP receive a 1:1 bilingual paraprofessional for instructional support. IEP goals additionally give insight into the needs of an ENL student with disabilities. All IEP mandates are provided for our ENL SWD population. Between the information from the exams and the annual review/triennial testing for a special needs ENL, these students receive support for their learning disability and language acquisition. Lessons are modified according to the IEP. Materials that are used are the same materials used for our general education ENL population and are outlined throughout this entire plan. Instructional strategies for ENL SWD pupils include all that are used by our general population. Currently content area instruction is delivered through our regular classroom setting and during ENL instructional periods. All ENL SWD students receive ELA instruction within the balanced literacy setting with support programs such as Fundations, Imagine Learning, Imagine Math, Myon Books and Moby Max. Students participate in read alouds, shared readings, and guided reading. Explicit ENL is delivered by the following methodologies and strategies: repetition, facial expressions, gestures, visuals, auditory, and tactile tasks are used. The listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills are also implemented. Instructional materials used to support ENLs include: the CALLA book, Rigby guided reading books, picture books, large type books, non-fiction books, fiction books, books across the content areas, Harcourt Go Math materials books, a multi-grade/multi genre classroom library, and Math Matters books. PS 104 places a strong emphasis on multi-modality instruction for our ENL SWD students. This is important due to the fact all avenues for learning need to be explored and implemented for the ENL SWD child. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7) Scheduling of our ELL SWD population is fairly easy due to the fact that we have ten students who qualify under the ENL SWD criteria. Our ENL teacher provides both push in and pull out service specifically for our SWD ENL population. All of our SWD ENL students are mainstreamed with general education ENLs in our ENL groupings (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding). Flexible scheduling is used to mainstream those students who qualify most specifically in mathematics since it is a common language to all. Students are additionally mainstreamed for non-academic subjects such as art, music, gym, lunch, computer etc. When mainstreamed during these times our SWD ENL population is maintained in the least restrictive environment. All ENLs and ENL-SWDs are included in all school programs including extra curricular activities such as Safe Space OST, NY Roadrunners, Achiiles’ Kids and much more. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  All interventions available to our general population are also available to our ENL students. These interventions include small group tutoring periods, Tier I classroom interventions that include computer assisted instruction and differentiation according to need, 1:1 tutoring where warranted, an ENL after school program for Grades 3-5 and our Saturday Academy for K-2 students during the winter months. on all grades prior to the NYSESLAT exam, use of Moby Max, an web based program, We additionally employ interventions on all grades for literacy/math, including differentiation, use of tiered assignments and choice boards. Tier II interventions include pull out instruction for literacy and math via a literacy/math specialist. All interventions are delivered in English with native language supports that include translation dictionaries, thesauri, etc. Content Specific interventions for all students including ENLs and ENL SWDs include: ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS LEVEL I INTERVENTIONS : Daily throughout the year – includes all ENLs and ENLs SWDs • Grades K- 5 : 120 minutes ELA • Differentiated instruction based on need • Guided Reading and 1:1 conferencing addressing individual student need • Reduced Class Size lowering Student-Teacher Ratio thereby enabling small group instruction on a daily basis. • Fundations Grade 3 • LEVEL 2 INTERVENTIONS: 2-3 times a week throughout the year • Fundations – K-5- small group phonics instruction, pull out, during the day • Earobics – Grades 2-3 special education • Great Leaps – K-5 Special Education • Early Success - Grade 1 - small group comprehension instruction, push in, during the day • Metacognitive Strategies Instruction - Grades 3-5 comprehension instruction, pull out, during the day • Lunch and Learn - Grades 1-5 - small group tutoring comprehension instruction, during the day • ELA/Readng in the Content Area Skills Work - Grades 1-5 - • ELA Skills Work/Reading in the Content Area/Test Preparation - Grades 3-6 – Saturday Academy • Circular 6R Skills instruction - Grades 1-, 1:1 or small group instruction based on student needs • Summer School - Grades 3-5- Small Group Instruction, 4 days a week for six weeks • At Risk SETSS Services - SETSS teacher identifies and supports non-mandated students via small group instruction based on need. . Imagine Learning Computer Assisted Instruction for language development • Safe Space OST After school tutoring MATHEMATICS LEVEL I INTERVENTIONS : Daily throughout the year • Grades K-5 : 90 minutes Math • Differentiated instruction based on need with Tiered assignments • Small Group and 1:1 conferencing addressing individual student need • Harcourt Go Math Differentiated Instruction • Math Consultant for Time on Task • Reduced Class Size lowering Student-Teacher Ratio thereby enabling small group instruction on a daily basis. LEVEL 2 INTERVENTIONS: 2-3 times a week throughout the year • Math Skills Work - Grades 1-5 - small group • Math Skills Work/Test Preparation - Grades 3-5 - small group, Afterschool • Lunch and Learn - Grades 1-5 - small group tutoring, during the day • Circular 6R Skills instruction - Grades 1-5, 1:1 or small group instruction based on student needs • Summer School - Grades 3-5- Small Group Instruction, 4 days a week for six weeks 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  • At Risk SETSS Services - SETSS teacher identifies and supports non-mandated students via small group instruction based on need. • Safe Space OST After school tutoring SCIENCE LEVEL I INTERVENTION • Reduced Class Size lowering Student-Teacher Ratio thereby enabling small group instruction on a daily basis. • Reading in the Content Area instruction through Core Knowledge with a focus on strategies LEVEL 2 INTERVENTION • Circular 6R Skills instruction - Grades 1-6, 1:1 or small group instruction based on student needs • At Risk SETSS Services - SETSS teacher identifies and supports non-mandated students via small group instruction based on need. • Safe Space OST After school tutoring SOCIAL STUDIES LEVEL I INTERVENTION • Reduced Class Size lowering Student-Teacher Ratio thereby enabling small group instruction on a daily basis. • Reading in the Content Area instruction through Core Knowledge with a focus on strategies LEVEL 2 INTERVENTION • Circular 6R Skills instruction - Grades 1-6, 1:1 or small group instruction based on student needs • At Risk SETSS Services - SETSS teacher identifies and supports non-mandated students via small group instruction based on need. • Safe Space OST After school tutoring ATTENDANCE INTERVENTION • Monitor attendance of At Risk students (less than 90%) • Conducts outreach services • Family counseling • Attendance teacher • Referrals to Support Agencies ALTERNATIVE INSTRUCTION SUSPENSION PROGRAM • Superintendent Suspension • Uninterrupted Academic Instructional Support • Frequency Based on Need • Counseling Provided • Reduced Teacher ratio enabling small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. IN SCHOOL SUSPENSION (SAVE) ROOM • Frequency based on needs • Counseling CONFLICT RESOLUTION PROGRAM • Whole class and small group lessons in conflict resolution • 1:1 counseling in resolving conflict/anger management • Small group, peer mediation • Family outreach and problem solving GUIDANCE COUNSELOR INTERVENTION • Group and Individual Counseling • Needs based • Students not meeting promotional/performance standards 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  • Students experiencing behavioral, emotional, family issues negatively impacting on learning • Referral to support agencies • Whole class/small group guidance lessons ENL SUPPORT COUNSELING • Guidance Counselor Support Services • Additional Educational Assistants or individualized Attention • Frequency Based on assessed needs SOCIAL WORKER INTERVENTION • Small group, individual and family counseling • Consultation with classroom teachers for development of behavior intervention plans • Crisis intervention/crisis counseling as needed 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 17-18 school year, PS 104 plans to host an after school program for Grades 3-5 as opposed to a Saturday Academy in that we will draw more numbers of ENL, upper grade students due to low ENL, upper grade student attendance on a Saturday. We plan on keeping our K-2 ENL Saturday Academy because attendance is high on a Saturday for these students. Additionally, PS 104 has hired a bilingual family worker, bilingual community associate, and bilingual parent coordinator in that our school’s ENL population is growing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As far as we are aware, PS 104Q never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All notices regarding after school programs and supplemental services are translated into native languages and distributed. Equal access is a priority in our school. Additionally, our bilingual parent coordinator spends much time with our LOTE parents explaining how the programs work etc. Lastly, our ENLs have equal access to all programs in that we have ENL students in all classes and are afforded the same opportunities as non-ENls. Our after school academic program is specifically ENL driven and is inclusive of non-ELL students. In addition to our school program, PS 104Q is host to one community based organization (CBO) programs called Safe Space Out of School time program. This program services students in homework help, art, music, sports, dance etc. The ratio of ENLs to non-Ells in these program are similar to the ratio of ENls to non-ENLs in our building. In order to promote these programs to families of ENLs, we offer translation services from the school to the CBO during the registration process. By doing so, many of our families feel more comfortable in registering their children for extracurricular activities. PS 104Q supplemental services are listed under the category of academic interventions. Title III funding pays for our academic, after school program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In addition to all regular school materials being available in both English and Spanish, PS 104 ENL students participate in Moby Max, a differentiated web based reading and math program. For our entering /emerging students, they are able to participate in their native language. Students on the higher levels participate in English. We additionally have ELLIS, EAROBICS, Reader Rabbit, Soliloquoy and Rosetta Stone English software on computers in classrooms to support student growth in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. We additionally have a 1:1 iPad initiative that allows our ENL students to access online programs such as Imagine Learning and Imagine Math from in school and at home if WIFI and a tablet are available. The materials used to support ENL language acquisition are Harcourt Go Math, balanced literacy, Passport to Social Studies and the NYC Science Scope and Sequence. PS 104Q has invested $40,000 per year in Imagine Learning and Imagine 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Math because these programs are specifically designed to support ENL students. Imagine Math is fascinating in that a parent and child can access a live teacher via the program in their native language when they require support in understanding math content and concepts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our ENL program and regular classrooms through materials in English with native language support through dictionaries, thesauri, Google Translator, laptios/iPads, and native language textbooks if required. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources align with ENL student ages and grade levels. We ensure this by Deirdre McShane, AP, creating the ENL teachers' program and entering the appropriate services into STARS programming. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 104Q does not share a building with any other school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For the students identified as ENLs enrolled prior to the beginning of the school year, PS 104Q hosts an orientation meeting for parents and children. Oftentimes, however, newly admitted ENL children do not enroll until September when school begins. We rarely have ENL students list noticed from local PreK programs to our school from the area. We hold our Parent Orientation in September for all ENL parents. We additionally reach out to each newly enrolled family during the course of the year to provide that same orientation and information essential to a parent making decisions regarding their child's ENL program. Newly enrolled students are provided with an orientation of the school community (i.e. library, technology room). Newly enrolled ELL students are provided with a Welcome from the parent coordinator in which they are formally introduced to teachers and administration. Additionally ELL students participate in Cultures around the world. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 104Q does not offer foreign language electives as an elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  The PS 104Q Professional Learning Opportunity Plan for all teachers of ENLs is quite extensive. In addition to ELL specific professional development, our staff is provided training in differentiation of instruction, curriculum mapping, performance task and rubric writing aligned with the Common Core Learning standards, checks for understanding, word walls, explicit vocabulary instruction and more. 1) ENL professional development for speech teachers, occupational therapist, physical therapist, school psychologist and social worker is conducted at their monthly trainings. All others including secretaries, guidance counselors, parent coordinators, family workers, general education teachers, special education teachers, subject area teachers and paraprofessionals are given professional development in house by our ENL teachers. Approximately 15% of all professional learning given at PS 104Q is ENL centered. This professional development is in the form of inter-visitations among classes, demonstration lessons, workshops and 1:1 conferencing with the ENL teacher regarding the needs of specific students. Additionally, the ENL teacher collaborates with teachers during common planning time on lesson planning. The ENL teacher confers with teachers on an ongoing basis to coordinate planning efforts to best serve ENLs in the classroom. Each classroom teacher in P.S. 104 was provided a CALLA handbook and packet to use as a resource for lesson planning. The professional development plan for all personnel of ENLs at the school is to collaborate and to be informed about the ENLs and best practices for working with this sub-group. Together, the ENL teacher, Principal, and school leadership team stay aware of the progress of the ENLs. Updates will be given as to how the ENL teacher as well as school personnel of ENLs can continue to work toward the ENL proficiency. Professional learning opportunities will be held once a month where topics such as ENL and standardized testing, cultural diversity in the classroom, visual tools to support instruction, how to use data to inform instruction and Total Physical Response in the classroom are provided. The PS 104Q ENL teachers are responsible for providing staff development on Using ELLIS (computer assisted program for English Language Learners) in all content areas; Cross Cultural Appreciation; ENL in the Content Areas; Communicating Successfully to ENL Students; BICS and CALP; inter-visitations where the monolingual teacher can view the ENL teacher in her classroom implementing ESL strategies. Calendar of PD dates for PS 104 staff include the following: September - Reading the NYSESLAT scores for ENL classroom and support service instruction. Differentiation based on need. October - BICS and CALP - Different approaches for language acquisition and use November - Cross Cultural Appreciation December - Communicating Successfully with ENL Students January - Reviewing TCWRP scores with a Lens on the ENL Child February - Total Physical Response: What is it? How does it Help the ENL Student? March - Working with ENL Families April - ENL and the Content Area May - NYSESLAT Test preparation June - A Year in review: How to measure an ENL student's growth over a year. Meeting agendas and sign in sheets are maintained by the ENL teacher and the assistant principal, Ms. Mcshane. An additional file is kept in the principal's office. Our ENL teachers participate in all Queens South BFSC ENL trainings and webinars as well as school based professional development sessions. They are additionally afforded the opportunity to attend Central NYCDOE professional learning as well. FSC and Central NYCDOE sessions include preparing students for the NYSESLAT, differentiation for ENLs, meeting the needs of ENLs, etc. Our ENL teachers then return to the building and turn key the training that they received. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 15% of all professional learning opportunities are dedicated to training teachers of ENLs. Please see the Question 1 response for specifics. We maintain documentation through agendas and attendance folders housed in the main office and in the ENL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  teachers' classrooms.For the 17-18 school year, we are looking to create an online repository for these documents so that they are readily available upon request. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During our regularly scheduled parent contact time on Tuesday afternoons, the ENL teachers set up individual meetings with parents of ENLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress in all content areas and all assessment results. This is done in partnership with the classroom teacher and with the bilingual parent coordinator for translation purposes. If a parent is unable to come at that time, the ENL teacher may also use her preparation period during the school day. If a parent is unable to attend during the day, conference calls are made with all involved. Additionally, progress reports in the native language are distributed between report cards to ensure communication with the ENL family specifically targeting academics. Yearly our guidance counselor is trained in how to provide support to ENLs transitioning from elementary school to middle school. Families participate in a Middle School Information meeting where all parents including ENL parents can receive information re: specific programs available to our students. Our parent coordinator makes appointments with our ENL parents to assist them in completing the middle school applications. Our guidance counselor works very closely with our ENL families in ensuring that the middle school of choice has the programs, supports and resources for ENLs akin to our school. Additionally, all administrators at PS 104Q are given training in how to provide support to those staff members who teach ENLs. Additionally, we ensure that articulation between the elementary school and middle school takes place. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The PS 104 Parent Involvement Policy is inclusive of all ENL parents. The academic, social and emotional experience of students will be enhanced as a result of the school’s increased parent participation specifically for those who are ENLs. As required under Title I and Title III, a parent meeting is held before the end of October outlining the PS 104Q Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and the School-Parent Compact. Both documents are distributed in English and in the native language. As a direct outgrowth of the involvement policy here at PS 104, our school will continue to implement the position of a full-time Parent Coordinator whose sole responsibility will be to promote parent engagement and address parents’ questions and concerns. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and is the primary contact for our Spanish speaking population which constitutes 13% of our school population. Workshops and Training Inclusive of ENL parents and community members are: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  2018-19 SCEP-FL 90 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kathleen Grady, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kathleen Grady Title Principal Deirdre McShane Assistant Principal Gilda Quijije Parent Coordinator Sherette Wright ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lizette Martir Parent Caitlin Mahoney/Grade 1 Teacher/Subject Area Mary Maiorano AIS Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Marie Rella Mary Barton Marie Rousse Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q104 School Name: PS 104Q The Bayswater Schol Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gilda Quijije Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the enrollment process of a new student, the school requests that families complete the HLIS with a teacher to determine the primary language of the student and parent. ENL teacher Sherette Wright administers the HLIS to families via an interview. Gilda Quijije, Bilingual Parent Coordinator, assists with any translation needs. If Ms. Quijije is unavailable, we use the Language Access phone number to translate. Information gleaned from the HLIS and interview is maintained and recorded in ATS, the HLIS and the translated blue emergency card. This information is also noted on the child’s cumulative folder. The data used to assess written translation needs includes the number of enrolled students including ELLs whose parents' primary language is a language other than English. The data used to assess the oral interpretation needs of the school includes the number of parental participants in school based events. Data is also accessible via the HLIS, ATS, Student School account, the Annual School Quality Report, Learning Environment survey, NYS Accountability Report and attendance records from school based events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic Portuguese Slovak Spanish Urdu Ukrainian 589 11 1 1 199 2 0 73.35 1.37 0.12 0.12 24.78 0.25 0 589 11 1 1 198 2 0 73.35 1.37 0.12 0.12 24.66 0.25 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendar Monthly Principal's Newsletter Monthly Parent Bill of Rights September Cell Phone Policy September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 94  NYS FOCUS Letter Emergency Drills September September Interim Progress Reports Monthly Parent Teacher Conference Four Times a year STARS Report Cards Three times a year Inclement Weather three times a year Afterschool Information three times a year NYCDOE Calendar September NYS Testing Dates March April Summer School June All Central Notices Sept-June Any school information Sept - June Translated documents on file in the Intranet Translated documents on file in the Intranet Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. STARS translates documents when coded properly Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Translated documents on file in the Intranet Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. Translated documents on file in the Intranet/ATS Translated documents on file in the Intranet Parent coordinator for Spanish. DOE Vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PreK-Kindergarten, ENL Orientations August, September Back to School Night September interpretation service(s)? Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Translators in each room and Translation equipment with individual 2018-19 SCEP-FL 95  Middle School Information Night November Title I Meeting October Town Hall Safety Meeting November Parent Teacher Conf November March Student Led Conferences Sept-June Bring Your Dad tp School Day September Walkathon Initiative Sept - December Favorite Book Character Day October headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Team of translators consisting of paraprofessionals, former student volunteers, parent volunteers. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Team of translators consisting of paraprofessionals. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Team of translators consisting of paraprofessionals and parent volunteers. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Team of translators consisting of paraprofessionals and parent volunteers. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 96  Adult Education Classes (ENL GED) Weekly Family Worker Outreach daily Parent Coordinator Outreach daily Attendance Team Outreach weekly SAT Outreach daily Guidance Intervention as needed Principal Suspension as needed Translation equipment with individual headsets. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Spanish speaking. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Spanish Speaking. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Spanish speaking parent coordinator and school aide. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Spanish Speaking family worker. We will also use "over the phone interpretation" services that are available 24/7 for languages that are not covered. Spanish speaking parent coordinator - use the LA phone system for arabic or invite an English speaking family member to join. Spanish speaking parent coordinator - use the LA phone system for arabic or invite an English speaking family member to join. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We request that ALL families to register with NOTIFY NYC. If the family does not register, a team of translators assemble to make calls. We additionally employ the "over the phone interpretation services" for languages not covered by our team of translators. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 97  Chanc reg A-663 distributed via email and with staff handbook in Sept. In addition, our LAC provides professional learning to staff members on using the Language Access system on a professional learning Monday in September. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per Chancellor's Regulation A-663, PS 104Q is required to provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school and NYCDOE. Our main lobby displays all translated signage so that we can identify the language that the parent speaks (language card). we also share this information at our ENL orientation, Back to school Night and during any September event. Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Students and other children (minors under the age of 18) do not serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. In September, a notice is sent to all families in their native language regarding the availability of translation services at PS 104Q and what languages our translators speak. Prior to Parent -teacher Conferences, we send out a notice requesting teams of parents to volunteer to these nights due to the high volume of translations required. In addition, PS 104Q promotes the Language Access phone number. PS 104Q has purchased a Language Translation System which headsets that translate in various languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms for monitoring feedback from parents include: informal survey, verbal feedback to the PTA and School Leadership Team and verbal/written feedback given to Gilda Quijije, Parent Coordinator. We implemented feedback by purchasing interpretation equipment for our families so that each could have their own interpretation headset. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 98 
