2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q108 School Name: P.S. 108 CAPTAIN VINCENT G. FOWLER Principal: JENNIFER IOVINE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Captain Vincent G Fowler School 342700010108 PreK-5 108-10 109 th Avenue 718-558-2700 EXT 0 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 27Q108 718-558-2701 Fax: Jennifer Iovine jiovine2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jennifer Iovine Patricia Klein BabeenaTribhowan Sara Palmese BabeenaTribhowan None None District Information JenniferAmbert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Room 201B Ozone Park NY 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens South Executive Director: Marlene Wilks 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Executive Director’s Email Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-520-6743 Fax: 718-348-2994 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Iovine Patricia Klein BabeenaTribhowan Gilda Quijije X X X X Melissa Sacco Sara Palmese *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Staff Member/Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Abeda Asma Leehowtee Seebalack Cindy Harricharan Deepa Lutawan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 108Q Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview All students will have a variety of opportunities to explore learning through in-depth units of study across content areas that will enhance their background knowledge, in order to think critically, collaborate with peers, and develop their social and emotional growth as life-learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 108Q is a PreK-5 school serving approximately 1400 students from a culturally diverse background. The school has many distinctive features that are reflective of the school culture, environment and academics. Historically, we have on average 60-65 classes, with approximately 10 classes per grade. These classes include: General Education, Integrated, Self-Contained, Gifted & Talented and 2 Pre-K classes. Whenever possible we try to reduce class size. We will continue to departmentalize our fifth grade program, as students have demonstrated overall improvement with their organizational, academic and social-emotional growth. To further support our fifth grade at risk students before transitioning to middle school, we added an additional teacher team to provide targeted one-to-one support. Structures are also in place to support our at risk students across all grades, these include: AIS Intervention Support Staff, After-School Programs and daily small group instruction. The school is structured to support team building and collaboration among all constituents. School-wide strategic collaborations begins with a collaborative Administrative Team, in which the principal and assistant principals work towards a unified goal to support teachers in building best practices, providing all students with access to quality instruction and establishing strong partnerships with parents and local community groups. Collaborative Teacher Teams on all grades work together to develop instructional plans to support all learners. This includes: analyzing student data, identifying trends, reflecting and modifying lessons, visiting colleagues classrooms and exchanging ideas to ensure positive impact on learning. Weekly professional development provides dedicated time for teachers to work towards these goals. Additional School-side systems are in place for teachers and administrators track and monitor individual student growth and progress on our dedicated school website www.ps108q.com, ensuring all students are have the supports needed to improve. We have several Special Initiatives/Partnerships at school. These include: STEM  Coding  Robotics   Rioult Dance Company   Algebra for All  PE Works  Arts Mondays  Character Counts  Stanford Harmony- Social-Emotional Support Student Led Conferences Collaborative parent partnerships start with our Parent Coordinator who is an active member of our team, and works collaboratively with the schools’ PTA and School Leadership Team to further support parent engagement and 2018-19 CEP 10  collaboration. Several school-wide systems are in place to enhance parents’ participation and build a strong School-Home connection. These include:  Parents have access to their child’s progress and grades in all content areas through our use of Grade Book-On Course. This program provides timely information to parents using a secure username and password.  Monthly Grade Parent Newsletters on all grades, provide parents with information regarding instructional focus for the month and suggestive links for parents’ reference.  PTA Monthly Newsletters and Parent Coordinators Monthly calendar provide information on upcoming Parent Workshops facilitated by local community agencies, parents, staff members including: OT/PT/Speech/ENL/Guidance/ Teachers and Administrators, as well as upcoming special events.  Parents have access to our school website- with a dedicated Parent/Guardian page, which includes links to Parent letters, teacher class pages and suggested resources. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student populations include our English Language Learners and Special Education students. Their needs include language development, developing comprehension reading writing and math strategies to support mastery of grade level standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide we made positive gains in the following areas:  Strong Family Ties- positive increase from 3.50 to 3.95 o   Rigorous Instruction- positive increase from 3.17 to 3.86  Collaborative Teachers- positive increase from 3.16 to 3.58  Trust- positive increase from 3.69 to 3.89  o Our key areas of focus will include the following: o To further support teacher development in the area of 1.2, specifically in the lower grades, by working with teacher teams to design authentic center and group activities; incorporating multiple opportunities for student-to-student questioning and discussion components to be embedded in lesson plans. This will help to strengthen and enable all students to build their confidence in their communication skills. o To continue to support teacher development in the area of 3B Questioning/Discussion, 3C Student Engagement, and 3d Student Assessment as reflected in the Danielson Framework. o The School Priority and Focus will be to work with teacher teams collaboratively to embed strategies that support student conversations and demonstrate an improvement in the quality of constructed responses. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q108 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1471 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 66 65 60 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 60 60 2 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 77.6% % Reduced Lunch 9.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 50.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.74 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 155 155 60 93.9% 7.3% 14.9% 5.9% 36.8% 1.7% 12 0% 6.7 58.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A YSH YES NO YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of MOTP/ MOSL Advance data for the 2017-2018 indicates the following : teachers are making positive gains in the Advance: there are 53 Highly Effective teachers compared to 37 in 2016-2017. There are 24 Effective teachers in 2017-2018 compared to 33 in 2016-2017- demonstrating teacher improvement from Effective to Highly Effective. There are no developing or ineffective teachers this year compared to 5 in 2016-2017. There is only 1 Ineffective teacher, compared to 4 last year. This data represents a continued overall increase in teacher performance, as evidenced by a comparative analysis of our MOTP 2017-2018 data. Although an overall analysis of our 2017-2018 school data represents strength in rigorous instruction. specifically demonstrating students are making positive gains and are actively engaged in their learning. Teachers continue to need further support and targeted professional development in components of the Danielson Framework specifically Domain 3: 3B Discussion/Questioning, 3C Student Engagement, and 3D Student Assessment as evidenced by September 2018-2019 Teacher Professional Development Survey. By working with teachers in this area provides a strategic approach that will have a direct impact on student outcomes by developing student’s critical thinking skills across all subgroups. As noted above an analysis of our 2018-2019 Teacher Professional Development Survey indicated the following as related to Danielson’s Framwork Domain 3 :  Only 30% of teachers chose Domain 3 as their area of strength.  47.5% of teachers wanted additional support in 3b questioning-with an emphasis on instructional strategies to support student’s critical thinking skills.  16% wanted additional support in 3c Student Engagement and 3d Student Assessment Although our strength lies in our dedicated and effective staff, by improving teacher practice in Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework this will have a direct impact on students outcomes by embedding rigorous instruction in all classrooms and further building students necessary critical thinking skills. Our priorities include: Identify teachers who need targeted support in Domain 3   Plan differentiated professional development to support teachers in these areas  Work with teacher teams to revisit instructional plans to ensure lessons plans and hands on activities include quality student questions, multiple opportunities for students to engage in learning and embed rigorous tasks. Share best practices of Highly Effective teachers  2018-19 CEP 13  Schedule Peer Inter-visitations throughout the year Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 15% increase in Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework as measured by increase in MOTP teacher observation data from Advance. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning will take place weekly on Monday and Tuesday after school for all teachers. Teachers will work together to embed questions into lesson plans to student promote student engagement using Depth of Knowledge Questions. Professional development will be differentiated to meet the needs of all teachers. Small group and one-to-one instruction will be utilized to support and engage Special Needs and English Language learners. Supplemental materials will be provided to those students to scaffold learning, including phonics, and intervention tool kits in literacy and math. Targeted professional development will be provided to all teachers to ensure strategies are embedded in daily teaching to support Special Needs and ENL students across all grades. Such strategies include vocabulary development with use of visual aides to promote and encourage student discussion and engagement, language acquisition, variety of concept webs for content related topics of study. Trust will be gained by setting norms and expectations to establish a positive working environment for all staff. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers, Professional Learning Team & Administrators Teachers, Professional Learning Team & Administrators Teachers 9/2018 - Parents 6/2019 Teachers, Professional Learning Team & Administrators Teachers observations will be aligned to the school-wide focus using the Danielson Framework Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers / Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, PTA, Parent coordinator and Administration will facilitate and provide ongoing workshops for families throughout the year focusing on strategies to promote student engagement. In addition, we will continue to provide online resources and programs for families to use at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning materials including supplies and copies. Per session for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019 at least 10% of teachers will have an increase in their instructional practice in Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Actionable feedback from teacher observations as reflected in Advance Data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide-specially in the area of Social Emotional Growth there was an overall increase of 2% percent from 89% to 91% comparative to 2016-2017 School Quality Guide. Additionally, we provide a supportive environment for all students by implementing several school-wide structures and support systems for students Social and Emotional growth. These include: PS 108 Motto, Character Counts with a focus character traits (Compassion, Citizenship…) and Classroom DOJO. Additionally, in January 2018 we piloted the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Program training two teachers on each grade who have implemented the program in their classrooms. Teacher observational data of student interactions and behaviors in those classrooms, as resulted in Highly Effective teacher ratings in the area of 2a- Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport and 2d-Managing Student Behavior of the Danielson Framework, as well as, demonstrated positive student-to-student interactions. Although we are making gains in this area, a deeper analysis of the School Quality Guide indicates only 88% teachers say they recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunity. It is important that all staff recognize and develop a mindset that having a supportive and secure learning environment between staff and students is essential to students social and emotional skills. Additionally, there was a decrease from 77% to 70% in classroom behaviors, specifically when students are working independently, as indicated by teachers on the survey. To address this, we have planned to implement daily activities focusing on students’ emotions, feelings, and student-to-student interactions that cultivate strong classroom relationship between all students. Priority needs include: -School wide implementation of Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Program -Continue to work with the Social Emotional Committee, which includes: teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Aides, Guidance... -Provide on-going Social Emotional Learning Professional development to all staff -To ensure implementation we will provide all staff with clearly defined protocols, practices and resources - Institute systems/structures for students to reflect and access their growth 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of staff will engage in professional development aligned to the 5 competencies of the Social and Emotional Learning Framework as measured by monthly sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will use Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Program incorporating the Five Competencies of SEL Framework. SEL Committees, which includes Special Education teachers and ENL teachers, will work collaboratively to develop systems, structures and resources to support all students. To support our special needs and ENL students, teachers will create Anchor Charts, Cozy Corner and conversational activity cards. Materials will be differentiated to support all learners - including Special Needs and ENL students. We will fully implement the Sanford Harmony program Social and Emotional Learning in all grades Pre-K-5 throughout the school year using Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement to accommodate all students. Specific times will be utilized to ensure Special Needs and ENL students have ample time for conferences. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers/ Students / Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers , Administration Teachers /Students / Parents 9/2018 -6/2019 Teachers , Administration To ensure school wide implementation Teacher Teams will turn-key protocols on Monday afternoons to colleagues. Teachers , Students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers , Administration Trust will be established by teachers turn-keying information to all staff in an open supportive environment. Parents, Students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers , Administration Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Newsletters will include a Social Emotional Learning section to provide parents with information and suggestions for use at home to promote positive self-awareness. Parent Workshops will be provided by teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, and the Parent Coordinator throughout the school year will help to ensure parents have the resources and support to use at home. Family Fun day events across all grades will provide parents and teachers opportunities to engage in their child’s learning, with a focus on their social emotional growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Professional learning materials including copies, supplies and teacher per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 75% of the staff will have participated in the SEL professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess progress we will use professional development sign in sheets and agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis from the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide and Framework Elements demonstrates an overall increase from 3.16 to 3.86 in Collaborative Teachers, this represents a .42% increase. Specific areas of increase included: Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction: 98% of teachers are working hard in teacher teams designing appropriate instruction to match to students individual needs. Additionally, in the area of Innovation and Collective Responsibility we also saw positive gains compared to 2016-2017. Although teachers work collaboratively with their colleagues in school, a further analysis of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Framework indicates only 56% of teachers said they had an opportunity to work productively with colleagues from other schools. Priorities will include:  Establish partnerships with at least two schools for teachers to co-collaborate  Develop a monthly schedule for teachers to meet at other schools as well as PS 108  Work with teacher teams to establish agenda's, protocols, and materials for targeted collaboration with other schools Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 20% of teachers will collaborate with colleagues from other schools as measures by inter school visitations. 2018-19 CEP 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers, Consultants, Administration Teachers, Students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers and Administration 9/2018 - 6/2019 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration Teachers, Students Parents, Teachers, Students Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work collaboratively during weekly professional development on Monday and Tuesday afternoon turn keying and sharing specific strategies with colleagues from other schools. They will collaboratively share ideas to address English Language Learners, Special Needs, and struggling students by developing a shared belief of how students learn. Professional development will be scheduled for teachers to explore, share, and create differentiated activities to meet the needs of all learners including Special Needs and ENL students with colleagues from other schools. This will include visual, auditory, and tactical strategies to address the needs of all learning styles. Teacher observations will include an assessment of quality of ongoing individualized student progress. Trust will be established by providing an open - risk-free environment for reflection and feedback among staff and parents. Parent workshops will be provided throughout the year to support strategies and hands-on activities parents can use at home. This will include a math manipulative resource pack and Literacy and Math Toolkits for parents to use at home to support Special Needs and ENL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will work collaboratively with partner schools facilitating monthly parent workshops throughout the year focused on engaging and promoting parent involvement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning resources and materials, copies, and per session for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 10% of teachers will have collaborated with their colleagues from another school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In order to measure and assess the progress of teacher collaboration with colleagues from other schools we will use the peer inter-visitation templates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data results from 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools show an increase in Effective School Leadership, specifically in the area of Inclusive Leadership. We received a 97% with a score of 4.40 in this area; this reflects a 2% gain compared to the district average and a 3% gain compared to the city average. A further analysis of Effective Leadership in the area of Instructional leadership indicates an overall rating of 93%, this also reflects a 4% gain compared to the district average and a 5% gain compared to the city average. A deeper analysis under Instructional Leadership according to the survey indicates only 79% of teachers indicated that the principal participates in instructional planning with teacher teams. In order to address this area, the principal will designate time to work collaboratively with teacher teams on instructional plans. Priorities include:  Establishing a monthly calendar during the year to track by visits   Work with teacher teams to establish clearly defined protocols, agenda's and targeted collaboration offering Set-up Teacher team monthly meetings support Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will have participated in at least two teacher team instructional planning meetings on each grade as measured by sign-in sheets from teacher team meetings. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will participate in Sub group committees to access the needs of the faculty with a school-wide focus on our instructional needs. All teachers will be involved in a teacher team with specific yearly goals. All teams will have yearly goals designed to promote teacher leadership. Specific teacher sub-group committees will be established to address the targeted needs of Special Needs, ENL and the lowest-third students. Professional learning opportunities will be given to these teachers to ensure they have a wide array of opportunities to explore ideas and strategies from their colleagues. Activities within the professional learning plan will be implemented in a risk-free environment using collaboration among the teachers. Parent workshops will be held throughout the school year to foster parent leadership, including our continued partnership with parent volunteers, expanding S.L.T membership, P.T.A and workshops facilitated by parents on Tuesday afternoons. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers / Administration Teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers / Administration Teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers / Administration Parents 9/2018- Teachers/ Administration/PC 6/2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will facilitate workshops to support and engage parents through a collaborative partnership. Teachers will co-facilitate workshops with parents as well in order to better support their children. The Parent Coordinator will also facilitate workshops to foster parent engagement and better support the home school connection. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers salaries, per session for teachers, Per Diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the principal will have participated in at least one teacher team instructional planning meeting on each grade as measured by sign-in sheets from teacher team meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess progress towards this goal as evidenced by the Professional Learning Teacher team sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Survey Elements and Multi-Year Summary indicates positive gains from last year. A deeper analysis reflects the following: 97% of positive responses in the area of "outreach to parents". This reflects a 2% increase from last year. In the area of parent involvement we received a 91% positive response. This is also an increase from last year. Although we have implemented many family events, which have been very successful, a review of the Learning Environment Survey in the area of "parent involvement" indicates that only 74% of parents say they have had the opportunity to volunteer at school. While this is a 4% gain from last year, we would like to continue to support parents in this area. In order to increase Strong Family and Community Ties specifically in the area of parent involvement in the school the following priorities will be put in place:  Work collaboratively with the PTA/PAC and Parent Coordinator to develop a plan of action to improve parent volunteerism.  Create a Parent survey to assess their interest in volunteering at the school by providing them with possible suggestions to further support their engagement.  Establish a system of protocols to follow up with parents who indicated interest in the survey. These will include: initial phone calls from the parent coordinator and PTA to assess parents availability and interest, pairing up parents with staff, set up a calendar system, and create passes for parents to identify volunteers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will see an increase of 10% increase of parent involvement as measured by the School Quality Guide in Strong Family and Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to work collaboratively with the staff, P.T.A/PAC to create a survey that assesses parents interest in volunteering, develop protocols to effectively monitor family engagement, set up a calendar system for tracking volunteers Parents, PTA/PAC, Teachers, PC 9/2018 - 6/2019 PTA President, Administration, Teacher representative Administrators and Teachers will work collaboratively to ensure all parents, especially parents of Special Needs and ENL students, have multiple opportunities to have access to volunteer in the classroom and at school events to provide additional support to our most at risk students. Parents, Teachers, Administrators 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers, Administration Trust will be gained through collaborative partnerships between P.T.A/PAC members, parents, teachers, the Parent Coordinator and administrators. Parents, Teachers, PC, PTA, PAC 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers, Administration, PC, PTA President, PAC 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will continue our partnerships with the Harlem Globe Trotters, NY Dental, NY Nets, NY Islanders and Rioult Dance Company throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase necessary materials for parent involvement which includes, certificates and any materials aligned to parent involvement in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will expect to see a 5% increase in parent volunteers at the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure our progress by volunteer sign-in sheets at multiple events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) To ensure all students who need A.I.S services receive them we use the ‘cut-off scale score’ for ELA in grades 3-5, as per Board of Regents guidelines. In grades K-5 we will use F & P Reading Benchmarks. Student portfolios and teacher feedback are used to track student progress. Identified students are tracked through our in house RTI Tracking system. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service is provided daily during the school day in small groupsand twice a week during after-school. Small group instruction is provided daily during guided reading lessons in all classes and as needed per lesson. I.C.T teachers provide parallel teaching to ensure all students’ needs are met, using a variety of instructional strategies . A.I.S teachers push in to classrooms to provide additional one-to-one and small group support. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) We use the Reading program called Treasures. Close Reading Strategies, annotating the text, and using text-based evidence questioning are embedded into the program. Students work in Triads (interactive) looking for text based evidence related to essential questions designed to promote critical thinking. We have incorporated several Modules from Expeditionary Learning in grades 3-5 into our curriculum maps. Teacher explicit modeling in literacy/writing is incorporated daily providing additional support through the program Write Steps, giving children time to reflect and write independently. After-school programs are also 2018-19 CEP 30  Mathematics Science available for at risk students in grades 2-5. An F-status Reading teacher will push-in twice a week to several classes; to provide additional support to at-risk students. Our Lunch Coordinator provides and IEP teacher additional literacy support to at-risk students three times a week. We use Go Math and Components of Engage NY which are being implemented in all grades. The intervention component in the program is used by A.I.S push-in staff. The math workshop model is used daily: teacher model, partner-triad work/independent work. Teachers meet with at risk students in small groups (4-5) and one-to-one when necessary . Service is provided during a designated math block of time which is a minimum if 100 minutes of daily math instruction and twice a week during after-school. Our Lunch Coordinator and IEP teacher provides additional math support to at-risk students three times a week. We use the C.C.L.S aligned Science book, “A Closer Look”, which provides students with grade level appropriate content plus additional supplemental materials for hands-on activities. Teachers incorporate the same Close Teachers use whole class and small group instruction to ensure students are able to successfully comprehend the text. Additionally, 2 Stem teachers will provide support to students in Pre-K -5 to enhance and support their understanding Service is provided weekly during the school day in small groups by classroom teachers and Stem Science cluster as well as and after-school program twice a week for 4th grade students. To ensure students who need A.I.S services receive them we use the ‘cut-off scale score’ for Math in grades 3-5, as per Board of Regents guidelines. In grades K-5 we use Math Baselines, Midlines and End lines to assess progress, as well as student portfolios. Science istaught on allgrades. Teachers meet weekly to plan their lessons and to create tiered tasks for students in order to give students additional support. 2018-19 CEP 31  Reading strategies they use in literacy. of Science related topics. Small group instruction Service is provided daily during the school day and by classroom teachers. Small group, one-to-one and whole group. Service is provided daily during the school day . Materials such as: National Geographic, Weekly News, Discovery.com, My ON and News O’Matic and a variety of websites are used as instructional resources. Hands-on activities are an integral part of out Stem program. In-depth units of study surrounding social studies based topics are embedded into curriculum maps. Visual supports and students reference tools will guide students understanding of the complex content. The use of a variety of complex non-fiction text, and Close Reading strategies will be incorporated into the program. We have two full time Guidance Counselors who provide mandated and at-risk students with intervention services during the school day. The Guidance Counselors utilize a variety of behavior intervention strategies in their sessions: Anger Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) We purchased a Social studies program called Passport to Social Studies in grade 3-5 which is aligned to the Scope and Sequence. It is taught daily by classroom teachers. Students who are identified as struggling readers through F & P benchmarks receive additional scaffolding to support their learning. Students who are mandated per their I.E.P receive services. At risk students are also provided with guidance support, as per parent’s request and teacher/ administration recommendation. 2018-19 CEP 32  Management ‘Fast Track’’, Reading Books such as, Script to-Graphic Series-Building character, and Anger Management. Conflict Resolution & Peer Mediation using the Defamation Manual. Monthly Town Hall Meetings with all grades provides time for them to meet with all students collectively to discuss expectations, share ideas and develop a positive school culture. Our school motto is read by different students each day during morning announcements: “ The PS108 student does the right thing at the right time because it’s the right thing to do, regardless of who is watching”, and is posted throughout the school. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 103 students identified as Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. To meet the needs of the STH population the following systems and services are in place: Using designated set-side STH funds, the school purchases materials they will need for the school year. This includes materials identified on grade supply lists. Working collaboratively, guidance, the parent coordinator, SBST team and administrators work to ensure these students have access to in house services as needed. Teachers provide on-going targeted support during the day in all subject area. Students are invited to after-school programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● When vacancies occur due to teacher retirement, administrators attend Hiring Fairs to identify highly qualified teachers to join the staff. ● During the school year we seek out qualified substitutes to cover teacher absences. Their performance is monitored by all staff, and when we find someone who has as high skill set, we include them in our professional development and support their learning. Over the last few years we have hired a few of our ‘regular’ substitutes and they’ve become effective members of our school team. ● Our continued partnership with HR helps to ensure that any new teachers we hire are properly certified. ● All newly hired teachers receive a Mentor who provides daily hands-on support. ● Weekly Peer-inter-visitation of best practices by all staff provides quality professional development. ● Model lessons & Co-teaching by administrators provides teachers with timely and targeted support . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Weekly professional development-for all staff on Mondays/Tuesdays- facilitated by teachers, consultants and administrators. Professional Development is differentiated and targeted to support teachers individual needs. Professional Development topics will include: Differentiating math instruction to support at risk students, Guided Reading Conferences, Writer's Workshop: Using Writer's Tool Kit, Using Technology to augment and support learning. ● Dedicated assistant principals by grade and/or subject area and sub groups allows for differentiated targeted professional development. This helps foster solid relationships and ensures professional learning is personal, purposeful and supports teachers’ individual needs. ● Teachers are given opportunities to participate in shared leadership roles, such as, grade leader, facilitators at professional learning sessions and as participants at conferences/workshops in order to expand their level of 2018-19 CEP 36  expertise. Paraprofessionals will be provided with targeted ongoing professional development designed to address their individual needs as well as the needs of the students they service daily. ● Each teacher establishes short and long term goals with administration, as aligned to the Danielson rubric, with a focus on incorporating feedback from their previous observations. This provides a ‘roadmap’ for teachers’ professional development plan which is targeted and purposeful. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We will continue to have two full day Pre-K programs, with 18 students in each class: totaling 36 students. To ensure continuity from Pre-K to Kindergarten within the school, Pre-K teachers collaborate with Kindergarten teachers throughout the year to familiarize themselves with the CCLS standards. A dedicated Assistant Principal provides professional development and supports of Pre-K throughout the year. To further ensure continuity the same Assistant Principal supervises Kindergarten, in this way, there is built in continuity from Pre-K into Kindergarten. To ensure a smooth transition from the CBO’s we schedule inter-visitations to the school by children and families who are zoned for our school. Annual screenings with incoming Kindergarten students and their parents in May and June, allows us to begin establishing a relationship with families and provides insight into their academic and social and emotional development. On the first day of school in September all Kindergarten students are accompanied to school with parents and are given the opportunity to visit the classroom for the morning session. During this time they meet with the teacher and learn about the instructional expectations for the year. This conversation is continued during the September Parent-Teacher conference held in mid-September. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 37  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● All teachers participate in weekly professional development sessions that include time to discuss, reflect and review assessments and plan accordingly. ● RTI bi-monthly meetings provide time for all constituents to meet and monitor student progress and to adjust instructional plans as needed based on teacher designed assessments ● Planning sessions with teachers on and across grades throughout the school year allow for open dialogue and time to review and determine the best instructional materials to incorporate materials by staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 745,808 160,174 19,534 14,239 8,001,946 x x x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5B, 5C, 5D 5D None 5A,5B,5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 CEP 38  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 108Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 108Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act 2018-19 CEP 41  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● supporting or hosting Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS108Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 42  ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member 2018-19 CEP 43  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits 2018-19 CEP 44  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 45 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: PS108Q is a Prek-5 School in District 27, that serves a population of 1420 students. The majority of the students are from low-income families and most of our students qualify for free lunch. Our diverse ethnic population consists of the following: 6% of our students are white, 6% black, 54% Hispanic, 34% Asian and others (others include Pacific Islanders, Alaskan Natives, and Native Americans). Currently 169 of our students are English Language Learners (ELL). The major language spoken by the ELL students is Spanish. The results of the 2018 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL Exam indicates the following: 18 Kindergarten students scored the following: 3 Entering, 5 Emerging, 4 Transitioning, 6 Expanding and 0 Commanding. The 25 First Graders scored the following: 6 Entering, 6 Emerging, 3 Transitioning, 8 Expanding and 2 Commanding. 40 Second Graders scored the following: 0 Entering, 9 Emerging, 19 Transitioning, 7 Expanding, and 5 Commanding. 23 Third graders scored the following: 0 Entering, 0 Emerging, 7 Transitioning, 14 Expanding and 2 Commanding. There are 36 Fourth Graders, they scored the following: 6 Entering, 3 Emerging, 5 Transitioning, 8 Expanding and 14 Commanding. There are 27 Fifth Graders, they scored the following: 3 Entering, 3 Emerging, 1 Transitioning, 9 Expanding, and 11 Commanding. In order to provide additional comprehension support to students in grades 2-5 we offer an intensive after-school program two days a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 2:20 pm to 4:00 pm. The three teachers are ENL Certified. Teachers provide ENL strategy based instruction to students during the after-school program and the Saturday Academy, which will be offered in the March. The students are grouped according to their proficiency level and guided reading levels. When appropriate, teachers work collaboratively on projects with all students. The after-school program will begin the first week of October, and is scheduled to conclude in the end of May. The rationale for implementing an ENL after-school program is based on historical data which reflects positive increases in student performance on both the State ELA Exam and NYSESLAT. The after-school and Saturday Academy teachers will utilize Language Power, Flying Start, and leveled guided reading books for the program. The program includes a robust phonics and vocabulary component, and additional items that include: student leveled readers, student practice books, guided reading books, vocabulary cards, and a writing component. Student data is collected on-line, reviewed and discussed with teachers, in order to provide follow-up support. After-school and Saturday Academy teachers share assessment results with classroom teachers ensuring continuity of instruction. The Language Power and Flying Start materials provide opportunities for explicit teacher modeling of specific comprehension strategies, skills, as well as, time-on tasks for children to practice and apply modeled strategies. An emphasis is placed on conventions of grammar, sentence structure and writing. A series of appropriate leveled books are also used to support student comprehension. In addition, teachers have several software programs/websites, which children 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information use for extended practice. These include: MyOn, News O' Matic, Newsela, BrainPOP, Fun for All, Activities for ENL Students, etc. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The three certified ENL teachers, classroom teachers, content area teachers and administrators will receive ongoing professional development by attending district level and citywide professional development sessions monthly including: ELL Compliance Support Institutes (ECIS) , Content and Academic Language Sessions (CALI), Advanced Collaboration for ELL's Professional Development for Administrators (ACE), ELL Instructional Leadership sessions (EILI), ELL Academy for Language Teaching (EALT), and Showcase Schools. The information gathered during these intensive professional development sessions will be turn-keyed to all classroom teachers, cluster teachers, and service providers of the ENL students during grade meetings, planning sessions, professional development sessions on Monday and Tuesday afternoons, and during peer inter-visitations. The focus of our in-house professional development sessions will be on the following: teaching effective guided reading lessons to meet varying needs of our struggling readers, incorporating vocabulary and language development into content area lessons, increasing support for ENL students using visuals, hands on materials, videos and anchor charts, analyzing and using data to drive instruction, creating center tasks to meet the needs of the students, looking at student work, modeling best practices with a focus on student engagement and quality questioning, and looking at rigorous instructional strategies. The teachers implement strategies from all professional development sessions into their daily lessons to directly impact the students' academic performance. Records of our in-house professional development sessions are carefully kept. Agendas and attendance sheets are provided for each session and filed in the principal's office. A professional development teacher survey was given to all teachers to gather information on areas where they would like to receive more support and professional development. The ENL team holds monthly ENL focus groups with the classroom teachers and content area teachers based on this survey. During these sessions the team analyzes student data, looks at student work, plans strategies for differentiation, and modifies lessons. The in-house professional development sessions are held on Mondays and Tuesdays from 2:20 until 3:40. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Attendance Workshop Kippy Johnson-Attendance Teacher Book-It Program Workshop Esther Rosa, PC Welcome to School Year Esther Rosa, PC, Dads Take Your Child to School Esther Rosa, PC Getting Ready for Middle School Paige Sacks, Guidance Stress Management Idania Murger –Dept. of Health &amp; Mental Hygiene Mommy &amp; Me Crafty Afternoon Esther Rosa, PC Begin description here: In order to assist our ENL students, it's important to use a multi-tiered approach to ensure that all ENL parents are part of the school community process and receive our support to ensure positive student outcomes. The following procedures are in place to enhance school-parent partnerships: We are dedicated to increasing parental involvement of our ENL students, therefore, the Administration, Parent Coordinator, and ENL teachers, and classroom teachers are active in promoting ENL parent involvement. ENL parents receive fliers about weekly/monthly parent workshops. ENL Workshops address specific strategies that ENL parents can use at home in all content areas of the curriculum in order to help their child succeed. The Parent Coordinator provides workshops and parent outreach on a consistent, on-going basis, as well as, supports the needs of the school's ENL parents at district-wide parent forums and training sessions. Parent Workshops are typically 2 hours in duration and the topics include: September: · · · · · October: · · November: · · Teachers) · · December: · · January: · · · February: · · · March: · · · · May: Character, conscience &amp; Values Esther Rosa, PC Specialized High Schools Marietta Daniel, H.S. Outreach Spring Workshop Esther Rosa, PC National Women’s Month Detective Angela Ellerby Thanksgiving Workshop Esther Rosa, PC Children with Autism Workshop Mrs. Powers/Mrs. Tajes&nbsp;(Special Education Bedtime Math Mr. Jacobson/Mrs. Fornataro&nbsp;(Technology Teachers) Respect For All Workshop Mrs. Sacks/Ms. Famulari, Guidance &nbsp;Sheltering Arms Support Stacy Zayas, Case Worker Christmas Around the World Esther Rosa, PC Paying for College Information NY Life Insurance Company Winter Snowman Workshop Esther Rosa, PC Raising a Confident Child Womankind Valentine’s Day Workshop Esther Rosa, PC Fire Safety &amp; Prevention Fire Dept. of City of NY DOE Regulations Regarding Commission of Human Rights 2018-19 CEP 49  (6 weeks) Nutritional Workshop Sandra Guzman – Cornell University Cooperative Mother’s Day Workshop Esther Rosa, PC IDNY Ayeyo Yusuf, Neighborhood Organizer Father’s Day Workshop Esther Rosa, PC Flag Day Celebration &amp; Parade Kindergarten &amp; 1st Grade Classes Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · Extension · · June: · · Parents are notified of all events through multiple approaches: all parents receive a phone call for each special event using the School Messenger Service, school information is updated on the school website (www.ps108q.com) on the Parents' Page, and letters are backpacked as well. Translated versions of parent letters are available and sent home as well. The Administration works closely with the Parent Coordinator and the teachers, to assess the needs of our ENL parents. The Parent Coordinator surveys parents at the beginning of the school year using a Parent/PTA Survey (offered in their native language), which asks parents to highlight workshops they would like during the school year. We have a school website (www.ps108q.com) in which parents have access to e-mailing administrators and teachers. During our Parent Teacher Conferences (four sessions will be held this school year) parents are asked to jot down suggestions and place them in our suggestion box in the main office. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents to discuss workshops and programs they think would be beneficial to them. Parent workshops are also scheduled for our math programs, Go Math and Engage NY. ENL teachers, Reading Specialist, our Parent Coordinator, and other staff members provide interpretation services for ENL parents. They also help translate all written communications sent home with students. NYCDOE translator service is used to translate all pertinent documents for parents of all ELL students. This includes our school brochure and parent letters. Each grade has several Family Fun Days where parents come in to work on activities with their children in the classroom. There are translators available to support the parents of ENL students. The materials are translated for them as well. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A N/A Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3. 4. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Captain Vincent G. Fowler School Borough Queens School Number 108 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jennifer Iovine Coach Sara Palmese ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Betty Mohammed, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Martinez, ENL, Teacher/Subject Area Maria Ortega, Joanne Ro Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Amy Hachemeister Coach type here School Counselor Paige Sacks Parent Lisa Naudus Parent Coordinator Esther Rosa Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1445 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 167 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.56%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following assessment tools are used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students: All programs across the curriculum are aligned to the Common Core Standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL program uses the reading benchmarks from September, December, February, and June to guide instructional planning for ELLs. This data is critical as our ENL teachers use it to group their students for their guided reading groups during the integrated instruction time. The program also uses the scores of the four modalities in the NYSESLAT to group students and plan instruction based on the students’ needs. This allows teachers to provide learning based materials and experiences utilizing their stronger modalities as well as creating opportunity for growth in their weaker modalities. All assessments are scanned, emailed to staff, and uploaded to our school website for analysis. All teachers and service providers use the data 2018-19 CEP 53  from the assessments to differentiate and drive instruction. Additionally, opportunities to discuss the data and ways to propel student growth are discussed at grade meetings where their teachers and service providers share best practices for instruction. Therefore, ensuring all have equal access to the data is essential. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We have several systems in place to evaluate student progress: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, classroom teachers, AIS teachers, administration and ENL teachers meet to analyze and discuss the results. The data is entered on a literacy tracking sheet which is shared from year to year with all teachers servicing the students. Teachers create small guided reading groups based on the students’ levels. They plan targeted instruction to meet the individual needs of the students. They work together to create specific centers and activities to meet the students’ needs. Small guided math groups are created. Lessons are modified to include manipulatives and hands on materials to assist the students. The students receive additional support through AIS and RTI. The students in grades 2-5 are invited to the after-school program and Saturday Academy for additional support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We have established a data tracking system for all students who are identified as being one year below grade level in Reading and Math. The students are assessed and identified by the RTI team for ELA and Math. There are three tiers of RTI, which include additional individualized/small group instruction based on students’ areas of needs. This data is used to determine whether the students need additional support or if they would benefit from a formal evaluation. The RTI teachers meet monthly to analyze data and plan instruction based on students’ needs. The data is shared amongst all teachers and service providers for the students. In addition to small group and individual instruction, the students use Mind Play to enhance their skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The Administrative Team, ENL teachers, AIS teachers and classroom teachers carefully analyze the results of the New York State ELA, Math and Science Exams. We break down each exam according to the standards to identify each student’s strengths and weaknesses. We analyze the results and highlight the trends among our subgroups. This information is essential when planning and revising our curriculum. The results of the NYSESLAT exam are used to identify the students’ strengths and weaknesses across all four modalities. The ENL teachers use this information for planning instruction and grouping students appropriately. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The Administrative Team works closely with the ENL teachers, classroom teachers and cluster teachers to share the results of these assessments. We meet to analyze the results, trends and implications for our students. Together, we use the information gathered to enhance our ENL program based on the needs of our students. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 54  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for our ELL’s is delivered through integrated and standalone ENL. The ENL teachers work collaboratively to plan and schedule their programs with the assistance of the supervisor in order to make sure that each student receives the mandated services he/she is entitled based on the number of minutes required as per CR Part 154.2. The majority of the students are clustered in 2 or 3 classes per grade, according to their reading level and proficiency level, in order to allow for a majority of push-in periods. The students throughout the school are homogeneously placed within classrooms based on their reading levels and ENL proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELA instructional minutes are delivered through an integrated model of instruction, where the ENL teachers push-in to classrooms during their ELA periods to assist ELL students in meeting the standard-based ELA learning target with the aid of an ENL language objective. ENL instructional minutes are delivered both as an integrated and standalone model of instruction. HLA instructional minutes are not applicable at this time. Weekly, Entering students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction, Emerging students receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes of either standalone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA instruction, Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either standalone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA instruction, Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. The ENL teachers push into the classroom during the integrated ENL/ELA instruction, and provide an ENL modified lesson to a small group of students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ELL students are taught content area curriculum by the classroom/cluster teachers. They are given materials in their native language as well as English. The teachers provide the students with extra support by teaching small group lessons and by incorporating group activities into their lessons. We placed a heavy emphasis on differentiation and modifying lessons based on the needs of the students. ELL students with language deficiencies are partnered with students who can assist them in their native language. Teachers provide the students with websites in their native language to assist them with the unfamiliar content area vocabulary. The use of interactive Smart Board technology provides students with visual support in language development. We focus on vocabulary development, use of picture cards, hands on materials, videos and real life experiences. We use a literacy program, Treasures, which has extensive resources for ELLs. This program has a rich vocabulary, spelling, and phonics sections which provides intensive scaffolding for student learning. We use a Balanced Literacy instructional method which allows for one-to-one support and small group instructional support throughout the entire 2018-19 CEP 55  day. There are multiple resources for guided reading on levels A to Z, and a home-school connection component. In mathematics, we use Go Math, which also provides additional built in resources for ELL students. Teachers use the Workshop Model instructional approach to teach and support students’ learning. Small group and one-to-one support is incorporated each day in math lessons. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have staff members who speak the many languages of our students (Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Hindi, Urdu, etc.) These teachers are called upon to assess the students’ comprehension and level of understanding in their native language. We do not have formal assessments in the students’ native languages.. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a Students with Interrupted Formal Education are placed in the corresponding ENL program level based on their ENL assessment.They are benchmarked using Fountas and Pinnell to determine their reading levels.They are grouped according to their proficiency level and reading level.They are invited to the the after-school programs and Saturday Academy for additional support.They are provided with high interest books on their reading level to increase their comprehension and confidence.We place a heavy emphasis on vocabulary, visual supports, making personal connections and hands on materials to support learning. SIFE students receive differentiated instruction in their classrooms: students are grouped together for guided reading based on benchmark reading scores, and small group instruction/and one-to-one instructional support is provided to students daily in all content areas. b. ELL students who have been enrolled in school less than three years (newcomers to the country) are placed in classrooms with other ELL students based on their reading level and proficiency level. Based on their proficiency levels newcomers receive ENL instruction according to their mandated times. The classroom teacher, the ENL teacher, and the AIS Support Staff meet regularly to analyze each ELL’s strengths and weaknesses in order to plan lessons to meet their individual needs. All ELL students in grades 2 to 5 are invited to attend an after-school program and Saturday Academy to enhance language acquisition using a variety of materials. To differentiate instruction, ENL teachers and the classroom teachers assess the students' reading levels using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmarking Program, and group students together by reading levels in small groups. The classroom teachers provide the students with a variety of literature books on their "Just Right Reading" level. The students are explicitly taught strategies to increase their level of comprehension through guided reading, independent reading, writing, shared reading, and read aloud lessons. They are provided with materials and are taught effective reading strategies in preparation for transitioning out the ENL program. We place a heavy emphasis on vocabulary, visual supports, making personal connections and hands on materials to support learning. c. Developing students (receiving service 4 to 6 years) receive Academic Intervention Services from our AIS Support Team in both ELA and Math. The AIS Team pushes into classrooms and provide extra support scaffolding student learning. Students are also invited to attend an after-school program and Saturday Academy with a focus on enhancing language acquisition using materials that are aligned to their individual needs. Using benchmark reading assessments, teachers are able to differentiate student instruction with small groups and one-to-one conferencing to support and scaffold student learning. RTI and AIS services are provided. d. Long term students receive the following support: In addition to ENL instruction and support, the Academic Intervention Team supports students in both ELA and Math using a push-in model which differentiates student’s instruction and support. The after-school programs are available with small class sizes, and are designed by reading levels to further differentiate and give targeted support. Teachers meet one-to-one with students to develop short and long term goals. e. Former ELL students (years 1 and 2 after testing Commanding), are continually monitored by analyzing their student data. If needed, teachers provide Academic Intervention Services in both ELA and Math using the push-in model which differentiates student’s instruction and support. 2018-19 CEP 56  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL-SWD's are afforded equal access to all school programs. PS 108Q provides all ENL children including SDW with double support services. Their first mandatory service is provided by our ENL certified teachers, and the second round of support comes from our literacy specialists. These teachers use a research-based Reading Program, "Treasures", as well as, immersing their students in small guided reading groups aligned to their reading comprehension level. The data collected from the reading teachers is shared amongst all teachers who share the responsibility of these children. During bi-monthly meetings time is allotted to review and reflect on student work. A continual review of student work helps us to identify their strengths and weaknesses, and helps the team to modify, intensify, or redirect the support. ENL-SWD children have an opportunity to participate in several extracurricular activities during the year. We provide an ENL after-school program three (3) days a week to all ENL children in grades 2 to 5. Teachers who teach these reading/math after-school programs are ENL certified. In addition, we have other afterschool programs in which ENL-SWD children can participate: Dance/Movement, Basketball, Volleyball, and Art. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The majority of our ENL-SWD children are enrolled in our CTT (Collaborative Team Teaching) Classes. The CTT classes have two (2) teachers (one certified in general education, and the other certified in special education). These teachers co-teach, and plan lessons that are aligned to the diverse needs of the children. Our AIS Team also push-in in classrooms to provide additional support to the ENL-SWD children. The ENL teachers work closely with the classroom teachers and the AIS team to devise a schedule ensuring that the proper mandated instructional minutes are being followed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide intensive targeted intervention programs for all ELL students, this includes students with less than 2 years, 2 and 4 years. All ELL students receive their mandated ESL services weekly in English, an Academic Intervention teacher provides support in all ELA/Math/SS/Science in English. Our goal is to provide ENL students with consistent support to enhance language acquisition. This year will continue to use the Go Math Program, which has multiple resources for English Language Learners. This program is designed specifically to differentiate instruction in mathematics. There is a section for ELL students for each lesson to assist with modifying the lessons to meet the students' needs. Treasures Balanced Literacy Program is used in all grades. All students who are identified as one year below level in reading and math will receive RTI intervention. This is an intense, three tiered academic intervention program that specifically focused on students’ weaknesses in reading and math. The students are serviced three times a week by an AIS teacher. The results of the assessments are shared and analyzed by all teachers and service providers for the students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue servicing our ELL students using the Freestanding English as a New Language model. The students will be grouped homogeneously in 2-3 classes per grade based on their proficiency level and their reading level. The students will receive the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction as per CR-Part 154. The AIS team will continue to support the ELL students in conjunction with the classroom teachers and the ENL teachers. Furthermore, according to our data, one notable trend is that many of our ELLs plateau at the expanding level of language proficiency. Upon closely analyzing their scores by modality it is evident that an area of deficit is writing. To remediate this we will incorporate more opportunities for writing within our program. These will increase in rigor by beginning with “Think-Write-Pair-Share” activities, advancing into “Quick-Writes” about a shared topic and onto extended responses in paragraph or essay form. Additionally, another modality that demonstrates low scores is listening. Therefore, we will also include more read alouds and present comprehension questions in both oral and written form. This will better prepare our students for what is expected of their performance. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 CEP 57  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELL-SWD's are afforded equal access to all school programs. PS 108Qprovides all ELL children, including SWD, with double support services. Their first mandatory service is provided by our ENL certified teachers, and the second round of support comes from our literacy specialists. These teachers use a research-based Reading Program, Treasures, as well as, immersing their students in small guided reading groups aligned to their reading comprehension level. The data collected from the reading teachers is shared amongst all teachers who share the responsibility of these children. During bi-monthly meetings time is allotted to review and reflect on student work. A continual review of student work helps us to identify their strengths and weaknesses, and helps the team to modify, intensify, or redirect the support. ELL-SWD children have an opportunity to participate in several extracurricular activities during the year. We provide an ELL after-school program three (3) days a week to all ENL children in grades 2 to 5. Saturday Academy in March is also offered for all ELL students. Teachers who teach the reading/math after-school program and Saturday Academy are ENL certified. In addition, we have other after school programs in which ELL-SWD children can participate: Dance/Movement, Basketball, Volleyball, Violin, and Art. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers have a wide variety of materials to use across the curriculum areas. NY Ready Engage NY Write Steps Science Reading Essentials Passport Social Studies Leveled Guided Reading Books Flying Start MyOn TIME for Kids NewsOMatic Newsela Spotlight Sundance Language Power Practice NYSESLAT Scholastic 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in the ENL model through use of books and materials in students’ native languages, labels throughout the classroom in English and native languages, ENL websites, and partnering students with students and staff who speak the same language. We have staff members who speak the following languages who are available to support and assess the students: Spanish, Hindi, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali and Punjabi. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher co-plan lessons that follow the grade curriculum and provide all required services by sharing resources that support the ELL age and grade level. The ENL teacher differentiates the lesson plan in the integrated instruction to meet individual need, age, and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent Coordinator and ENL team work closely with newly enrolled ELLs and their families in the beginning and throughout the school year. The ENL team meets with each newly enrolled family and offers support as they transition into the school year. The Parent Coordinator works with newly enrolled parents to partner them up with other families as a support system. The Parent Coordinator offers the new families with information and support in their native languages. She surveys the families to see what workshops they would benefit from attending. The ENL team sets up a buddy system to ensure and build a comforting setting for newcomer ELLs. The student is usually paired with a peer and staff member who shares a common native language. ELLs are given support inside and outside of the classroom through the help of peers, the assistance of ENL teachers, classroom teachers, cluster teachers as well as the building leaders. Students who enroll throughout the school year are partnered with a buddy to help guide them around the school and depending on their needs of language the buddy will assist them in academics until the student gains some independence. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Continuous professional development is offered to all classroom teachers, content area teachers and ENL teachers within the school and throughout the city/district. Staff development sessions are held during weekly planning sessions, grade meetings and during the Monday and Tuesday professional development sessions. The teachers are trained in implementing effective strategies across the curriculum areas. They are trained on how to modify instruction to meet each student’s individual needs. Within the school, teachers train one another on successful teaching practices through inter-visitations and planning sessions. A schedule is created for master teachers to model lessons for their colleagues in their areas of expertise. ENL teachers and classroom teachers participate in district and citywide professional development sessions. They implement different strategies and ideas into their lessons and they turnkey the information to their colleagues. PS 108Q identified the professional development needs of its staff using teacher surveys and teacher development rubric. We concluded that in order to help our ELL students meet the Common Core Standards, professional development in the area of effective use of teacher practices to support student increased performance was a priority. All targeted staff will work with high quality staff developers and specialists. Training and support will focus on the following: * NYS-ENL standards aligned to core curriculum * Best approach methodologies, instructional strategies, and ENL prototypes *Assessing students through conferencing *Incorporating literacy in the content areas *Discussion Techniques *Vocabulary Integration * Data analysis and comprehensive needs assessment 2018-19 CEP 59  * Parent involvement * Preparing students for the NYSESLAT * Maximizing the NYCDOE Workshop Model * Strategies for Differentiated Instruction 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All classroom, content area and ENL teachers receive in-house and out-of-the building professional development throughout the school year. They keep track of their 7.5 hours of professional development in a log. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers turnkey the professional development they receive on a district level on Monday and Tuesday afternoons to the staff. Teachers log their peer inter-visitations on a specific template on Google Docs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers and classroom teachers will schedule meetings with ENL parents starting in September during the Tuesday afternoon extended time. At these meetings, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher will discuss the goals of the ENL program with the parent. Translators will be provided for the parents who need one. Follow-up meetings will be every two months. All students participate in student led conferences with their teachers and parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Administration works closely with the Parent Coordinator and the teachers to assess the needs of the parents. The Parent Coordinator surveys parents at the beginning of the school year using a Parent/PTA Survey, which asked parents to highlight workshops they would like during the school year. We have a school website in which parents have access to emailing administrators and teachers. Monthly Newsletters are sent home in English and in their native language. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents to discuss workshops and program they think would be beneficial to them. The ENL classes and Math workshops for adults/parents have helped them to enhance their language skills, help their children understand how to do their homework and better their education. We have parents of ELLs volunteering in the school and working closely with the PTA Board members and the Parent Coordinator. During Parent Teacher Conferences parents are asked to jot down suggestions and place them in our suggestion box in the main office. We also use the results of our Learning Environment Survey to evaluate the needs of our parents. Review of these results help us to determine what areas we need to improve upon and where we are successful in regards to communication with our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jennifer Iovine, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 108Q Captain Vincent G. Fow School DBN: 27Q108 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jennifer Iovine Title Principal Amy Hachemeister Assistant Principal Esther Rosa Parent Coordinator Betty Mohammed ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lisa Naudus Karina Tajes Parent Teacher/Subject Area Joanne Rosette Teacher/Subject Area Sara Palmese Paige Sacks Mary Barton Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Melissa Martinez Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 6/7/18 1/1/01 6/7/18 6/7/18 1/1/01 6/7/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q108 School Name: The Captain Vincent G. School Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Esther Rosa Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our ELL teachers interview all new parents and review the Home Language Surveys with them. During the interview, the parent is asked if they would like school notices sent to them in English or in their home language. At that time, we also determine whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the teachers and administration. We maintain a current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information must be maintained in ATS and on the Student Emergency Card. Our school provides translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively. Some of our parents choose to rely on an adult friend or relative for language and interpretation services but minors under the age of 18 may not serve as interpreters for school staff and parents, during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement or student conduct are discussed. Our school will contact the DOE to provide translation services during regular business hours, to present whose primary language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate with school staff and school officials regarding critical information about their child's education. Depending upon availability, interpretation services may be provided either at the location where the parent is seeking to communicate or by telephone. Our school 2018-19 CEP 64  will send important parent documents to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to be translated into the covered languages in a timely manner. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Arabic 1410 124 35 24 85.92 7.56 2.13 1.46 1394 128 41 24 84.95 7.8 2.5 1.46 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families -September-June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. -DOE Translation services will be sent 3 weeks prior to school wide distribution to ensure parents receive documents in a timely manner. -DOE Translators -Bilingual staff assist during Parent Teacher conferences September-June -DOE Translation Service September-June DOE Translation services will be sent 3 weeks prior to school wide distribution to ensure parents Important school bulletins/parent letters are either sent to the DOE for translations into the following languages: Spanish, Bengali, Punjabi, Arabic, Hindi, Chinese, and Urdu. The parent coordinator does the Spanish translations. We also use School Messenger which can be programmed to send phone messages in different languages. We provide parents whose primary language is a covered language with a translation of any document that 2018-19 CEP 65  contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to, a student's health, safety, legal or disciplinary matters, and entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. Brochures, Grade Newsletters For non-cover languages September-June September-June receive documents in a timely manner. -DOE Translators -Staff-Bilingual -DOE Translation services will be sent 3 weeks prior to school wide distribution to ensure parents receive documents in a timely manner. We will use DOE Translation vendor-Big Word 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to At all of our parent-teacher conferences and student led conferences we provide translators to all parents. We ask the parent before the conference if they want a translator and we make sure that we have one on hand. The guidance counselors will make phone call together with translators to parents that do not speak English. Teachers will schedule meetings with parents regarding academics, attendance & lateness, and behavior, and will provide translators at all of these meetings. provide interpretation service(s)? Staff-Bilingual -September "Meet the Teacher" Access to DOE over the phone Translation and Interpretation Service -November, March, and May Parent/ Teacher Conferences Access to Big Word service 2018-19 CEP 66  Family Day/Night events October-June in all grades Math/Literacy Nights October-June Student Led Conferences November-June Staff-Bilingual Staff Bilingual Staff Bilingual Access to DOE Translation and Interpretation Services Non-cover languages will use the over the phone interpretation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger, PS 108QWebsite, Bilingual staff assistance, PTA and parent volunteers with various language backgrounds assisting with phone messages and communication with parents Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This Regulation will be placed in our staff handbook and shared at our first professional development meeting to ensure everyone is aware of the policy and procedures. A professional development session will be held to discuss Interpretation and Translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have a Welcome Poster in all of the seven languages that are spoken at our school displayed on the front door that is at the entrance to the main lobby. We provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Our school's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We receive feedback from parent surveys, ELL teachers, classroom teachers, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator. We then meet as a team and discuss the feedback. 2018-19 CEP 68 
