2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q115 School Name: P.S. 115 JAMES J. AMBROSE SCHOOL Principal: DANIELLE LAPORTE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The James J. Ambrose School 26Q115 School Number (DBN): 342600010115 Pre-kindergarten-Five 80-51 261 Street, Floral Park, NY 11004 718 831-4010 Phone Number: 718 831-4014 Fax: Danielle LaPorte dlaporte2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Danielle LaPorte Marc Ciprut ShernetteWalters Jessica Russo NA NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 631-6943 Phone Number: 718 631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens Plaza North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, L.I.C. NY 11101 LPender@schools,nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 391-8222 Phone Number: 718 391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle LaPorte Marc Ciprut ShernetteWalters NA NA NA NA NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable StephenCheng ChanelleTekaaho RossanaLi Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Beena Gani Jessica KilcommonsRusso Rachel ArfanisFritz KristinaSilvagni Alexandra DeCanio N/A N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S.115Q, The James J. Ambrose School is to ensure that all students will be college and career ready as they move on to the next phase of education by individualizing instruction to meet the needs and styles of all of our students in accordance with the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards. School-wide analysis of data through collaborative inquiry team meetings will help us to fully understand the areas of support needed for each individual child. This will foster an environment where our multicultural, multilingual students, as well as students with special 2018-19 CEP 9  needs, gifted and talented students, and limited English proficient students will be educated equitably. We utilize various methodologies to encourage student-led inquiry amongst one another, which will support critical thinking and decision making skills. In addition, we will continue to use staff development opportunities as well as frequent observations and feedback cycles supported by “The Danielson Framework for Teaching” to enhance and grow our instructional practices and ensure the effectiveness of instruction. We will continue to include parents in the education of their children by expanding parent workshops and encouraging parental involvement at every turn to support and reinforce the learning process. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At the James J. Ambrose School we believe in high expectations for all students and utilize various methodologies of instruction to encourage high levels of student engagement and student-led inquiry to support critical thinking and decision making skills. We have been able to support our students through rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards. Through the collaboration of our teacher teams, we have modified our curricula-aligned assessment practices to hone in on targeted areas in need of improvement, and then applied the data that we have collected in order to best inform our instruction. We have aligned the use of various resources to support our instructional goals and ensure that we meet each student’s individual needs. In addition, we have provided support for teachers through specific actionable feedback following frequent cycles of observation informed by the Danielson Framework For Teaching and the analysis of learning outcomes. We have nurtured the structures that are in place for maintaining a safe, supportive, and positive learning environment, an inclusive culture, and celebrated student success. This year we will continue our partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to support our work in building stronger and proficient readers and writers. Through this collaboration we will receive support from staff developers from Teachers College to tailor our instruction to meet the needs of our students. This year we have added the new Amplify Science Curriculum to align to the NYS Science Learning Standards and to support the science content by providing our students with hands-on learning experiences where they will explore different phenomena. STEM lessons will continue to be implemented in classrooms to ensure that we are developing the critical thinking skills necessary for student success in the 21st Century. At the James J. Ambrose School we continue to use Professional Learning opportunities to enhance and grow instructional practices, as well as frequent observations and feedback cycles supported by the “Danielson Framework For Teaching”. Professional Development is aligned to our school's vision, mission, and CEP goals. Teachers engage in hands-on learning activities to grow their professional practice and enhance their pedagogical skills. As a school community we believe that strong teacher collaboration leads to high levels of student achievement. Our commitment to how students learn best- setting high expectations, differentiation, group work with accountable talk, and high levels of student engagement with rigorous tasks drives every lesson in all academic areas. At the James J. Ambrose School we believe in providing our students with a well-rounded education and therefore incorporate many opportunities for students to showcase their talents. Students engage in instruction and learning experiences in music, dance, technology, media/debate, physical education/health, visual arts, and technology. We also offer many after-school enrichment opportunities such as Computer Science, Chorus, Basketball and Cheer-leading. With the support of our PTA students also engage in after-school programs such as Robotics, Coding, Mandarin lessons, and Chess, and are provided with dance residencies throughout the year. It is important for our school community to include parents in their child's educational experiences by expanding upon the parent workshops we offer based on parent interest and encouraging parental involvement at every turn, to support and reinforce the learning process. Through our "Family Day" initiative we continue to engage families in becoming active participants and partners in their child's learning and to learn alongside their child in the classroom. Parents engage in STEM lessons, writing celebrations, interactive read-alouds, social studies tasks, and math activities. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our Virtue of the Month and Book of the Month Programs continue to support our work in developing good citizens and supporting our students in being the best person they can be in our society. Through this program, our students have learned values that promote a positive learning environment, good citizenship, and a culture where all students feel valued, supported, and safe. We are looking to continue this program in the 2018-2019 school year where we also include student voice in selecting the virtue recipients and include staff members in receiving virtue vouchers as well. To support our students with Social Emotional Learning we also incorporated the use of a mood meter to support students in being able to articulate and express their feelings, and provide them with strategies to cope with different emotions so that they could move to a better emotional state and be able to focus on their academics. The dedication and hard work from the teachers, students, and parents, have earned P.S. 115Q, The James J. Ambrose School Blue Ribbon recognition for high excellence for the 2017-2018 school year. We are so proud of this academic achievement which demonstrates the academic excellence taking place at our school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. A collaborative school-wide analysis of data helps us to fully understand the areas of support needed to meet the varying types of learners in our school, including English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and Gifted and Talented students. Our English Language Learners (ENL) and our Students with Disabilities (SWDs) need differentiated supports in order to access the same rigorous tasks in all academic areas. We are dedicated to closing the achievement gaps with our ENL and SWD subgroups by using various forms of student data to gain a deeper understanding of our students and how they learn best including the use of different modalities. We will use this knowledge to differentiate lessons in order to meet their individual needs, while still holding high expectations for all students. Our Gifted and Talented students need to be challenged to go deeper with the content in all academic areas and need to be provided with opportunities to make their own meaning by taking ownership of their learning and engaging in inquiry based lessons. This student population learns best when they engage in rich discussions with their peers, are taught using an inquiry approach to learning, and engage in project-based learning activities that are connected to real-life applications. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area in the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has shown the most growth this past year has been in Collaborative Teachers. In the 2016-2017 school year we received a score of 4.27 for Collaborative Teachers and in the 2017-2018 school year we increased to a score of 4.64, which is an increase of 0.37. Having two new curriculum programs this past year (Teacher's College Reading and Passport to Social Studies) the teachers collaborated and met as grade level teams to not only unpack the curriculum but also work to raise the level of the tasks as needed and plan and prepare the tools and supports some students would need as additional resources in order to access the same rigorous task. Teachers also engaged in inter-visitations this past year to observe, learn, enhance their pedagogical practices, and work to ensure coherency across the grade. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to strengthen teacher collaboration as well as build teacher capacity in leading and facilitating professional learning across the school building not only as grade-level teams but also in cross-graded teams as teachers attend various Professional Learning Opportunities and turn-key the information to their colleagues. Another key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be to engage students in rigorous instruction across all content areas with differentiated supports to meet the needs of the diverse learners. We will continue to build upon our shared understanding of how students learn best (setting high expectations, group work with accountable talk, student engagement with rigorous tasks, and differentiation) and ensure that we design tasks for students that 2018-19 CEP 11  engage them in critical thinking skills and challenge students at all levels while providing supports, so that all students have access to complete the tasks successfully. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q115 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 753 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 30 4 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 43.0% % Attendance Rate 36.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 12.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.13 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 75.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 63 30 95.8% 5.6% 10.1% 5.6% 70.3% 4.2% 2 5% 5.9 81.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -At P.S. 115Q we ensure that teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. Teachers ensure that unit and lesson plans are coherent and introduce complex materials to engage the students in higher-order thinking skills to build a deep understanding around specific content. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue our partnership with Teacher's College Reading & Writing Project to support our students in becoming stronger readers and writers and to engage them in critical thinking skills. We will also continue to provide instruction in math that engages students in discussions as well as more real-life application where they have opportunity to use the knowledge of the math content and put it into practice using real-world problems. As a school community we believe in engaging students in collaborative group work activities as well as hands-on learning by incorporating an inquiry-style approach in classroom lessons. These collaborative group activities foster problem solving skills and promote a high level of student to student discussions and questioning, which are all necessary for student success in the 21st Century. After analyzing our 2017-2018 NYS Math Testing data, we noticed the following: -Our overall proficiency level in Math was 81.58%, which is an increase of 3.05 from the 2016-2017 school-year. 35.1% of our SWD students demonstrated proficiency which was an increase of 14.3% from the previous school-year. 46.2% of our English Language Learners demonstrated proficiency which was a decrease of 8.4% from the previous school-year. -81.82% of Grade 3 students demonstrated proficiency on the NYS Math Exam, which was an increase of 2.54 from the 2016-2017 school-year. 21.4% of our SWD students demonstrated proficiency which was a decrease of 11.9% from the previous school-year. -84.82% of Grade 4 students demonstrated proficiency on the NYS Math Exam, which was an increase of 9.21 from the 2016-2017 school-year. 45.5% of our SWD students demonstrated proficiency which was an increase of 27.3% from the previous school-year. -78.33% of Grade 5 students demonstrated proficiency on the NYS Math Exam, which was a decrease of 3.72 from the 2016-2017 school-year. 41.7% of our SWD students demonstrated proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 14  Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 81% of teachers say that students feel challenged, 78% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions, and 75% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. The average teacher rating for Component 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction for the 2017-2018 school-year was 3.38, which was an increase of 0.14 from the 2016-2017 school-year. The average teacher rating for Component 3c. Engaging students in Learning for the 2017-2018 school-year was 3.17, which was an increase of 0.26 from the 2016-2017 school-year. Advance Ratings for 3C. Ineffective- 0%, Developing- 18.89% , Effective- 81.11%, Highly Effective- 0% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase student engagement and achievement in mathematics with a minimum of a 10% increase in the number of students demonstrating math proficiency as measured by the critical area assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in Professional Development focused on understanding and creating the criteria for rigorous tasks. All teachers Grade level teams will create/modify Math PBAs for the end of each math unit (Critical Area). Teachers All students Sept. 2018 to October 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Team Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Teachers will engage students in the pre-critical area review by having them work in groups prior to administering the critical area PBA individually. Teachers will engage students in problem solving strategies including the use of CUBES to solve math problems. Teachers will use the "Rigorous Tasks" checklist to ensure that math tasks are aligned and engage students in critical thinking skills. All students Dec. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Students Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Teachers will provide scaffolds, supports and use flexible grouping to ensure all students have access to the rigorous math tasks. All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 One cycle of observations (Cycle 2) will focus on math instruction to measure the level of engagement (3C) using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Grade-level teachers Dec. 2018 to February 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will pull small groups for targeted math instruction based on assessment data. Targeted students Teachers will provide differentiated supports such as visuals, hands-on manipulatives, Total Physical Response (TPR), and sentence starters to support SWDs and our English Language Learners in understanding and connecting to the math content. Teachers will engage students in number sense routines to build mathematical understanding and to deepen student math conversations with their peers. SWD and ENL Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, ENL Teacher, SETTS Teacher All students Nov. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assitant Principal, Teachers School Leaders will assess an increase in student engagement by analyzing the average teacher rating for Component 3c. Engaging Students in Learning during math lesson observations. Grade-level Teachers Dec. 2018- January 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 16 Teachers will enter data collected for each critical area assessment in Google Docs to be analyzed by the instructional cabinet after each critical area is administered. Teachers Dec. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers School leaders will facilitate learning walks during math blocks to assess and ensure implementation of the action plan. Teachers and students Nov. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction in a number of ways. Teachers will facilitate one parent workshop in the fall focused on the math skills and strategies taught during the year so that parents can support their children at home. Teachers will send home a monthly newsletter with information about the math unit/content that students will learn each month and include ways parents can support their child at home by including strategies taught within the chapters. School leaders will invite families to visit classrooms (Family Day events- approximately once a month) where at least one visit is during math instruction time so that parents can learn the strategies and models used in the classroom to be replicated at home. Teachers will send home student math assessments at the end of each unit so that parents are informed how their child is progressing and can see where their child is struggling in order to provide additional support at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Team District 26 Math Series PD Citywide Professional Learning Opportunities District 26 PLC Work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  By February 2019 we will increase student engagement and achievement in mathematics with a minimum of a 5% increase in the number of students demonstrating math proficiency as measured by the critical area assessments. As of February 2019 only some of the grades were able to administer the critical area assessment as the assessment is given after certain chapters. Based on the data we had up to this point 69% of our students demonstrated math proficiency on the first critical area assessment.We were not able to measure increase in proficiency as we only had 1 baseline assessment at this point in the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Go Math PBA Math Rubric to assess critical area assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths- Our Virtue of the Month Program has been very successful in educating our students on important character traits that promote positive behaviors and result in a community of respectful citizens. Each month students learn about a new virtue and work to demonstrate the virtue throughout the month and beyond. While this program supported students in understanding the expectations for appropriate behavior and built a school culture where all students felt valued and supported in their academic, social, and emotional growth, we still had a number of incidents where students did not respect one another or make good choices in relation to following the virtues of what makes a good citizen. Our Book of the Month selections continue to align with our Virtue of the Month so that the virtue is reinforced through a read-aloud. Students are able to make connections with the characters and demonstrate a deeper understanding of the virtue because they can connect it to a story. To promote an inclusive culture and a supportive environment we also schedule "Buddy" classes where lower grade classes visit upper grade classes once a month to discuss the virtue and engage in a project together. Over the course of last year, many students received a Virtue Voucher for demonstrating an act of the virtue. Some of the students received more than one for the same virtue or one for each virtue. Priority Needs-After a careful analysis of the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) report at the end of the 2017-2018 school year, there were 65 A24 occurrences (51.18%), 6 A33 occurrences (4.72%), and 18 A36 occurrences (14.17%). The data also showed a total of 127 Level 1-5 Incidents at the school. Of the 127 occurrences, 31 of them happened in the school playground during lunch recess and 39 of the incidents took place in classrooms. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 84% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching, 86% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities, and 77% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. As a school community we believe it is important for us to support our students in understanding their emotions in order to help them manage their feelings so that they can make positive choices where everyone feels safe and included. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 19  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of students will have knowledge of the mood meter and how it helps to support them in articulating their emotions throughout the day which will result in a 10% decrease of A24 and A33 infractions as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reports. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All classrooms will have the mood meter up with access for students to identify their emotions throughout the day. Teachers and all Students Sept. 2018 All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, All teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor All staff members will educate their students on what the mood meter is and how it is used. Teachers and Students Sept. 2018 to Oct. 2018 Teachers will identify and create a system to check in with students who identify themselves on the mood meter as feeling angry or sad. Teachers and Students Sept. 2018 to Oct. 2018 School leaders will conduct learning walks to monitor and assess the implementation of the mood meter in classrooms. Teachers and Students Oct. 2018 Jan. 2019 April 2019 June 2019 Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Students All Students Nov. 2018 to Dec. 2018 Nov. 2018 to June 2019 A Mood Meter box will be placed at the main entrance for students to indicate if they are feeling angry (in the red) or upset (in the blue). School leaders or the Guidance Counselor will check in with those specific students in the morning and at lunchtime. The school Guidance Counselor will facilitate lessons on how students can monitor and manage their frustrations in different situations. A schedule will be created for classroom visits. School leaders will hold lunchtime Clubs and Conversation with students identified by staff members who continuously come to school feeling angry and/or upset. Identified Students The Guidance Counselor will start a peer mediation group during lunch time to train selected students to support other students in handling conflicts respectfully. All Students Nov. 2018 to June 2019 The Guidance Counselor will begin using the Sanford Harmony Program with Kindergarten classes. Kindergarten Students Oct. 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 CEP 21 Managing frustrations to create a supportive learning environment will continue to be part of the criteria for Student of the Month recognition. All Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher and classroom teachers will provide picture support for ENL students to help them understand the mood meter and the various feelings/emotions. ENL Students Sept. 2018 Special Education Teachers will provide support tools and hands-on activities to help SWDs understand the mood meter and how to manage their frustrations. Students with Disabilities School aides will receive training on the mood meter and will be provided with strategies to use with students who are feeling angry (red) or upset (blue). All students Nov. 2018 School safety team will review OORS report data every two months to assess how we are doing in reaching our goal. School safety team Nov. 2018 Jan. 2019 March 2019 May 2019 June 2019 to June 2019 Oct. 2018 to June 2019 All Teachers, ENL Teacher, Principal, Assistant Principal Special Education Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, School-aides Principal, Assistant Principal, Safety Team members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to a workshop focused on understanding social and emotional development as well as the mood meter to support their children in being able to identify their emotions and manage frustrations facilitated by the administrative team and the Guidance Counselor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literature on the Mood Meter to be discussed with staff and parents Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 100% of students will have knowledge of the mood meter and how it helps to support them in articulating their emotions throughout the day which will result in a 5% decrease of A24 and A33 infractions as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reports. As of February 2019 we have exceeded our February and June goal where we have decreased our A24 and A33 infractions by 25.7% for the same time period last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Reports Learning walk checklist Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths- Teachers currently meet during their common planning time to develop their lessons, assessments, and rubrics in all content areas. They have spent time this past year on learning the new Teacher's College Reading Program and Passport to Social Studies Program by unpacking each of the units of study and lessons and planning rigorous tasks as well as the supports and scaffolds students would need to access the task. By strengthening the common planning meetings we have seen more coherency across classrooms on a grade in all academic areas. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the overall score was 4.64 for Collaborative Teachers which was an increase of 0.37 from the 2016-2017 school year. According to the School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers said that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the developmental needs and learning interests of all their students, 97% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching, 100% of teachers say that they talk to one another about instruction, 94% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development. According to the Advance data for the 2017-2018 school year, the average teacher rating was 3.17 for Component 3C. Engaging Students in Learning. Priority Needs- Based on Advance data collected through formal and informal observations we need to increase the level of rigor in the tasks we ask students to complete. The tasks should align to criteria for rigorous tasks and should engage students in opportunities for rich discussions and critical thinking skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a minimum of a 0.10-point increase in the average overall teacher ratings in component 3C of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in Professional Learning focused on 3B Questioning & Discussion Techniques to support student engagement in lessons. Teachers Teachers will engage in Professional Learning focused on 3C. Engaging Students in Learning to support student engagement in lessons. Teachers Teachers will embed best practices including our shared beliefs about how students learn best across content areas in all lessons. Teachers After each cycle of informal/formal observations, school leaders will analyze the average teacher ratings for component 3C to identify trends noticed across classrooms in order to make revisions to the PD plan. Teachers Sept. 2018 to Nov. 2018 Nov. 2018 to Jan. 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal JESA Sessions with the Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach will focus on looking for evidence of high student engagement in observed lessons. Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach Common planning time will be embedded in the daily prep schedule at least 3-4 days a week with one day of different preps to allow for teacher inter-visitations. Teachers Sept. 2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Teachers will engage in a minimum of two inter-visitations with their grade level colleagues to look for levels of student engagement. June 2019 Teachers Oct. 2018 to May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers During Teacher Team meetings teachers will work to plan instruction in all content areas aligned to Component 3C. Teachers Sept. 2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Feedback to teachers on the Advance observations will focus on student engagement and our shared beliefs about how students learn best. Teachers will plan all units and lessons with specific accommodations for SWD and ENL students such as visual support tools, technology, hands-on materials, and scaffolded questions and tasks. June 2019 Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 25  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will support families by facilitating a minimum of two parent workshops on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement time focused on different content areas and/or based on parent needs. (One workshop in the Fall and one workshop in the Spring) Teachers will utilize Tuesday Parent Engagement time to meet with parents to discuss and give feedback on children's progress. Teachers will utilize Parent-Teacher conferences, report cards, and informal conversations to provide parents with feedback on how their child is progressing and ways they can support them at home. Teachers will send home monthly newsletters informing parents of units of study in all content areas and offer suggestions of ways they can support their child at home. School leaders will ask teachers to document parent meetings/phonecalls. School leaders will collect attendance sheets and feedback forms at the end of each parent workshop. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session Instructional Team Prep Schedule Monday Professional Learning Time Tuesday Parent-Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a minimum of a 0.05-point increase in the average overall teacher ratings in component 3C of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 26  As of February 2019 two cycles of observations have been completed. The overall rating for 3C for Cycle 1 was 3.00 and the overall rating for 3C for Cycle 2 was also 3.00. We are currently not meeting our February goal of a 0.05-point increase in the average overall teacher ratings in Component 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths- Through frequent cycles of feedback, the Teacher Tenure Team, and Professional Development sessions, teachers have developed a deeper understanding of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and observation ratings have shown great improvement in teaching practices. School leaders continue to meet with grade level teams to collaboratively plan lessons in different content areas and continue to provide multiple opportunities for teachers to grow professionally and take on many leadership roles. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the overall score for Effective School Leadership was 3.94 which was 0.05 lower than the 2016-2017 school-year. Priority Needs- A review of 2017-2018 Advance data observation reports revealed that only 11.11% of teachers received a rating of Highly Effective on Component 4E while the majority of the staff 88.89% received an overall rating of Effective which indicates that they have attended Professional Learning however school leaders did not build their capacity in faciitating and leading the work with their colleagues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 school leaders will build teacher capacity in leading and facilitating professional learning to their colleagues as measured by 50% of teachers receiving a highly effective overall end of year rating in component 4E of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will support teachers in developing a shared understanding of each of the elements for 4e. Growing and Developing Professionally. Teachers Nov. 2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal School leaders will support teachers in developing a shared understanding of what effective and highly effective practices look like for Domain 4E. School leaders will meet with teachers after they attend a Professional Development session to help plan how to turn-key the information to their colleagues. Teachers Teachers Dec. 2019 Oct. 2018 to Nov. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal School leaders will create a spreadsheet to equally distribute leadership opportunities and strengthen individual teacher practices in a specific content area. School leaders will attend Professional Learning facilitated by teachers and use the information to rate Domain 4e of the Danielson Framework. Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will select Professional Learning opportunities to attend that meet their interests and needs. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers School leaders will support teachers interested in leading teams or school-wide initiatives. (ie. STEM team, Field Day, Multi-cultural Day, Family Literacy Night) School leaders will use the information from Advance data at the end of each cycle of observations to assess the average number of teachers receiving a rating of Highly Effective on component 4e to measure if we are on track for reaching our target goal. Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers Nov. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal Jan. 2019 March 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 29  Teachers will facilitate parent workshops a minimum of two times a year (Fall and Spring) to promote parent engagement and support parents in being able to help their child at home. Teachers will be encouraged to plan and facilitate parent events such as Family Literacy Night, Family Math Night, Family Paint Night, Family Fitness Night, English classes, Together Time for the younger siblings of our students (2 and 3 year olds). Parent Coordinator will begin to hold parent Book of the Month Clubs once a month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 school leaders will build teacher capacity in leading and facilitating professional learning to their colleagues as measured by 25% of teachers receiving a highly effective overall rating in component 4E of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As of February 2019 we have exceeded our February goal of 25% of teachers receiving a highly effective overall rating as 28.85% of teachers have received a highly effective rating in Component 4E of the Danielson Framework. We are on track for meeting our June goal of 50%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data on Component 4E. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths- At P.S. 115Q we have a strong parent community who wants to be involved in their child's education. Parents are interested in learning how to support their children at home and want more opportunities to be invited into the school building to see instruction in action. We have been encouraging parents to take advantage of Tuesday Parent Engagement Time by making appointments with their child's classroom teacher or cluster teacher to strengthen the home/school connection. In the 2017-2018 school year we had offered families a number of opportunities to come into the building for a variety of school events such as Breakfast with the Principal, Family Day, parent workshops facilitated by teachers (a minimum of 2 per grade/teacher), winter and spring concerts, an art showcase, dance performances, class celebrations, writing celebrations, Multi-cultural day food and dance performances, and our Virtue of the Month assemblies. On our 2018-2019 Framework for Great Schools Report, we received a score of 4.17 in the Strong Family-Community Ties Element, which was an increase from 4.15 in the 2016-2017 school year. Priority Needs- Based on parent concerns which were shared throughout the year, parents feel that they do not understand the new way of mathematical thinking and are therefore unsure of how to help their child at home and support them with their homework especially in using the math strategies taught in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase parent understanding of the math skills and strategies used in classrooms by 10% as measured by parent surveys and feedback forms. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A parent survey will be emailed to parents through the parent distribution list at the beginning of the year, middle of the year, and end of the year asking parents about their comfort level (Scale of 1-5) in math vocabulary, math strategies, effective problem solving explanations, and math tools. Parents Oct. 2018, Feb. 2018, June 2018 Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers will facilitate one parent workshop in the fall during Tuesday Parent Engagement time on math strategies. Parents Oct. 2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Parents will be provided with a list of key strategies taught within each unit of study with examples to help them support their children at home. Parents Dec. 2018 Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Parent Workshops will be held supporting parents with math vocabulary, effective word problem explanations, math tools, understanding the math rubric, and the Think Central online website. Additional workshop topics will be based on parent needs. Parents Jan. 2019 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers One Family Day lesson will be focused on math instruction in the classroom so that parents can see math in action. Parents January 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Grade-level monthly newsletters will have information about the units of study in math for each month and ways parents can support the unit at home. Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Parent feedback forms will be given after each workshop (What parents found helpful, What they would like more support in) to determine future workshops. Parents Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Documents and parent flyers for school-wide events will have the stamp indicating "Important Document Please Have This Translated" in multiple languages for families of English Language Learners. Parents of English Language Learners Dec. 2018 to June 2019 ENL Teacher, school-aides School-based translators will be available during all school workshops. Parents of English Language Learners Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, ENL Teacher, School-based translators 2018-19 CEP 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session Tuesday Parent Engagement Time Family Day Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will increase parent understanding of the math skills and strategies used in classrooms by 5% as measured by parent surveys and feedback forms. As of February 2019 we have increased parent understanding of the math skills and strategies used in classrooms by about 6% on average. We are currently exceeding our February goal of a 5% increase and are on track for meeting our June goal of a 10% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys and feedback forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Dayby classroomteachersor specialeducationteachers After School (pendingfunding) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group One-to-one AIS after schoolprogram Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ResultsfromNYSELAExam ELAAISservicesprovidedduringtheschoolday Fountas& PinnellBenchmarkReadingLevels Formative/SummativeClassroomAssessments ReadingandWritingStrategies Smallgroupinstructionforreadingandwriting LeveledLiteracyIntervention(LLI) Studentsreferredto SchoolImplementationTeam, PupilPersonnelTeam, or Responseto InterventionTeam SPIREProgram FundationsProgram GreatLeaps Decodingstrategies, comprehensionstrategies 2018-19 CEP 34  Mathematics ResultsfromNYSMathExam Teacher Observations of student work Formative& SummativeClassroom Assessments GuidedReading Practiceof wordsolvingskillsusingthe CUBESstrategy Reviewof differentstrategiestaughtthrough theGo Mathcurriculum Visual Representations CriticalAreaPerformance Based Tasks Scaffoldedinstruction Use of manipulatives End of unit assessments Periodic Assessment Data Studentsreferredto SchoolImplementationTeam, PupilPersonnelTeam, or Responseto InterventionTeam Small Group One-to-one During the School Dayby classroomteachersor specialeducationteachers Tutoring After School (Pendingfunding) After School ENL Science Teacher Observations ScienceAISservicesareprovidedduringtheschooldayby theclassroomteacheror Scienceclusterteacher. Small group During the School Day One-to-One After School (Pendingfunding) Student Conferences Formative& SummativeAssessments Teacher Observations Social Studies SocialStudiesAISservicesareprovidedduringtheschooldayby Small group During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 35 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student Conferences theclassroomteacherwith a focuson thecontentandskills. One-to-One Formative& Summative Assessments Re-occurring behavioral issues Scheduled Meeting Times Small Group During the School Day Parent requests Respect For All Program Teacher observations and anecdotal notes(MoodMeterinformation) Virtueof the Month Program One-to-One Mood Meter and strategies to manage frustrations Referralsby classroomandclusterteachers SanfordHarmonyCurriculum PPTmeeting notes 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  We plan on supporting our STH students by providing them with school supplies, books, and other educational services such as counseling and AIS intervention programs so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. We will also provide funding for all school trips and activities at no cost to parents, if required. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $1,022.00 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 115Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P. S. 115Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Guide Report, Quality Review Report. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. 2018-19 CEP 43  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 115Q ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with the Next Generation Learning Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Next GenerationLearning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; workshops. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theEvery Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The instructional Title III Program is the E.N.L After-School Program. One certified E.N.L teacher, using English as the sole language of instruction, teaches the program. It's offered to all Entering to Expanding ELL’s in grades K-5 (about 50 students). The duration of the program is 60 sessions at two hours a session twice a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays) starting in October 2018 and running until June 2019. On Wednesdays the only operational after-school program is the Title III program; therefore, a supervisor needs to be in the building. To meet the different needs of our ELL’s we will categorize them by grade and level of proficiency of the English language. There will be 6 groups and each group will be instructed for 10, two hour sessions. Invites are sent to parents in requested languages which are translated by the translation unit. In addition, we have many in-house translators that are utilized when invites are not returned, to call home and discuss the program with the parents. We also utilize "Language Line", the over the phone translation unit, when the language of the parents request is not available with our in-house translators. The E.N.L. teacher, maintains records of parent notification letters sent home in parents preferred language, as stated on their HLIS in an E.N.L. After-School binder. The weekly student attendance for the E.N.L. after-school program is also maintained in the E.N.L. After-School binder. This after-school program will provide “Direct Supplemental Instruction” and go above and beyond the core program for our ELL student population. This Academic Intervention for our ELL's will reinforce second language acquisition with hands-on projects/activities connected to rigorous reading and writing pieces. The activities are geared to strengthen independent reading, build fluency in content areas, build critical thinking skills, and expand reading and writing experiences. We will also take a class trip to The Hall of Science to investigate and explore hands-on experiments. The students will then write an authentic writing piece about their experience at the Hall of Science. To immerse ELL's and have them grow as writers and speakers bridging language and culture in a non-threatening environment, the ENL teacher will differentiate and scaffold instruction based on the student's level and needs of the core subjects. This program is a fully hands-on program that integrates various learning standards in the academic areas of science, math, reading and writing. Students will learn teamwork and management skills and will be provided with a well-balanced and comprehensive array of language activities that support the academic as well as the social and emotional development of ELL children in the 21st Century. This year we will purchase supplemental language development material which will only be utilized during the Title III after-school program. All supplemental material will be locked up when not being used in the Title III after school program. The supplemental material purchased will be grade and skill specific, and on different proficiency levels. The supplemental materials purchased will benefit students by providing extra enrichment in building their reading comprehension skills, vocabulary knowledge, grammar usage , word study skills, math computation, word problem strategies and their writing skills. All of the supplemental material 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information purchased is in alignment with the Next Generation Learning Standards. We will purchase Parent as Partners "Kids Learn!"Getting Ready for K-5th Grade" and "Words Their Way ELL Word Study" levels 1-4. These resources will help build listening, speaking, reading, vocabulary and writing skills. In addition, we will purchase a subscription to ixl.com which is a skill and grade specific online program that enriches students' mathematical computation and reasoning skills and builds the mechanics of the English language. This program is aligned to the Standards and is also connected to Go Math, the math program in our school. Paper, card stock and Lexmark ink for the classroom printer will be utilized to create hands-on visual support for students attending the after-school program. It is our sincere expectation that, with this program, our ENL students will learn skills in literacy, math, mapping, technology, science, and socialization while working on the various modalities of Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing. The rationale for the selection of the programs/activities comes directly from our CEP as part of our action plan for rigorous instruction is to provide innovative strategies for ELL students, which support their improvement in academic achievement. Based on the data from the 2017 and 2018 N.Y.S.E.S.L.A.T., our overall average on how our ENL students performed on the different modalities is as follows: 70.6% on Listening, 78% on Speaking, 68% on Reading, and 61.2% on Writing. The modality where most of our students struggled in the lower grades (K-2) was in Writing, while the modality where students struggled the most in the upper grades (3-5) was in Reading. This data will enable us to target our instruction to meet the needs of the students. In addition, classroom data has also shown the need to improve reading comprehension and building vocabulary skills within ELA and Math. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: During the months of January and February of 2019 on Monday's after-school from 2:40 P.M. to 3:20 P.M. free professional development opportunities will be offered to all staff members who serve ENL students and former ENL students. The ENL teacher will present 4 grade specific workshops (2 workshops for Kindergarten, First and Second grade and 2 workshops for Third, Fourth and Fifth grade). One workshop will focus on "NYSESLAT Best Practices". This workshop will help classroom teachers learn what each modality (Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing) encompasses and strategies to implement to improve the ENL students' performance in the classroom. The second workshop will focus on "Scaffolding Instruction for ENL students". This workshop will provide teachers with support in scaffolding classroom instruction and independent activities. All workshops will positively impact the progress of ENL students by presenting different techniques on ways classroom teachers can differentiate tasks to ensure that all ENL students have access to rigorous instruction in their classrooms. The purchase of the Lexmark toner cartridges will be utilized to print research-based material to present at the multiple professional development workshops. In addition, the ENL teacher will be attending free monthly District 26 ENL professional development workshops with a focus on academic language and standards-aligned writing strategies for ENL students. The ENL teacher will turnkey valuable ENL information to classroom teachers to provide rigorous instruction for their ENL students. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: For all ELL parent workshops, parents are notified with a translated letter (if available) inviting them to attend the free workshop. (These letters are translated by the Translation Unit.) Parents are asked to complete the tear-off if they will or will not be able to attend the workshop. The ENL teacher will maintain, in an ENL binder, all agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in parents' preferred languages. In addition, in-house translators are available during the workshops. The ENL teacher will facilitate two parent workshops for parents of ENL students. Parents have requested workshops on how to help their children increase their English language development at home. Therefore, on Tuesday, December 11th, 2018 the ENL teacher will present and model how to use the IXL as well as other helpful language websites to increase English language learning in math and language arts, at home and during after-school. On January 15th, 2019 the ENL teacher will discuss the NYSESLAT and the different skills in each modality of the exam. To be proactive, parents will also be informed of various websites to assist them in building knowledge of ELL resources. On May 21st, 2019 the ENL Teacher will facilitate a "Summer Learning" workshop on fun educational activities to encourage English language development over the summer. These hands-on activities will build and expand the parent and child relationship where they both learn from each other and have mutual admiration. The ENL teacher invites all ENL parents that have children attending the Title III after school program to the last session of each group (January 2nd and 3rd, March 27th and 28th, and June 19th and 20th). The ENL teacher will model different studying strategies/habits to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. The children and their parents will engage in hands-on experiences with different rigorous activities to build good study habits at home. Doing so will create conversations amongst the parent and their child and build critical thinking skills. In addition, parents are invited to attend the experience of exploring the Hall of Science in June 2019. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,181.50  Per session  Per diem Purchased services Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 60 sessions x 2 hours each session x 1 teacher ($60.65) = $7,278.00 30 sessions x1 hour each session x 1 supervisor ($63.45) = $1,903.50 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 5 hours workshop planning x 1 teacher ($60.65)= $303.25 -IXL.com (Math and English Mechanics Services) @ $349.00 - Kids Learn! Getting Ready for (K, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Grade) x 20 for each grade level x $9.49 each book= $1,138.80 -Words Their Way ELL Word Study x Levels 1-4 x 15 for each level x $10.31 = $607.80 -10 cartons of paper x $26.82 each carton = $268.20 -8 packs of colored card stock x $5.21 each pack = $41.68 -Lexmark Ink 5 Toner Cartridges @ $225.77 N/A Exploration of the Hall of Science 1 Trip @ $250.00 N/A $12,366  High quality staff $303.25 $2,631.25 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A $250.00 N/A $12,366 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The James J. Ambrose School Borough Queens School Number 115 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Danielle LaPorte Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Danielle Keller Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent NA Assistant Principal Kristal Tang Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Grace Marcos Parent Coordinator Kevin Burke Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 712 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 41 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.76%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 115Q implements the New York City Periodic Assessment, Go Math pre and post unit assessments as well as the beginning of the year, mid-year and end of the year assessments, Teachers College Writing Workshop Rubrics with pre and post "On Demand" unit assessments, A-Z Learning, Accelerated Reader, Fountas and Pinnell, Fundations and teacher-created assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. These assessment tools are useful to strengthen every students individual needs. The school leadership and teachers use the results of these assessments to differentiate instruction and assist students in having achieved a one-year gain. We will utilize New York City Periodic Assessments for grades 3-5 as tools to build students' academic skills as well as to pace appropriate instruction. For grades K-5, we implement A-Z Learning to improve student's reading comprehension skills and fluency to improve their reading levels. This online reading program provides an innovative continuum of instruction tailored to each student's level and needs. For grades 2-5, we implement Accelerated Reader to build students' reading comprehension skills. To assess the early literacy skills of ELLs we implement Fountas and Pinnell Baseline Running Records. Teachers use these assessments to identify independent reading 2018-19 CEP 54  levels and correlate their levels to where they should be at different points in the year. In Kindergarten we implement Fundations to build letter formation, phonological and phonemic awareness, sound mastery, vocabulary, comprehension strategies and written comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During weekly common grade level planning meetings teachers discuss what assessments they have to complete, ones completed, and the results of the assessments. The data and the next steps for instruction to meet the needs of the students are discussed with the ENL teacher during congruence meetings which will take place twice a month or during weekly preparation periods. In addition, Fountas and Pinnell testing is initiated four times a year (2 fictional assessments and 2 non-fiction assessments) and the results are discussed with the ENL teacher to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 115 evaluates the success of our program for ELLs according to the test level growth on the NYSESLAT. We look at the student's scale score on the speaking, listening, reading and writing sub-tests to identify their areas in need of improvement. We also look at NYCPA, T.C. Writing pre to post "On Demand" assessments, Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, and the State Exams to identify baseline, progress, and what skills need to be improved upon. Based on the results of the NYSESLAT, across all grade levels, students need to improve using grade-appropriate language to structure thoughts and ideas in writing about literary and informational texts and topics. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Twice a month the ENL teacher will have congruence meetings with classroom teachers to discuss concerns of targeted skills or growth of their ELLs. Based on these meetings, the ENL teacher will turn-key intervention strategies to help ELLs become successful in targeted areas of need during the Monday PD "Share Days". In addition, teachers differentiate instruction for ELLs according to the child's needs. Teachers work in collaboration to positively engage ELLs with rigorous academic content. To building their academic skills, the core instruction is linked to the students prior knowledge to make learning meaningful and motivating. ELLs are given a variety of activities such as hands-on activities, T.P.R., the use of visual aids, personal word wall charts and different thinking maps to strengthen their specific skills in need of improvement. Teachers increase the amount of time during one-on-one conferencing or small group instruction to strengthen the skills of needed growth. Progress is monitored with post-assessments to assess if the ELL student has demonstrated an increase of knowledge of the skill being taught. If progress is not shown teachers research other instructional methods during Teacher Team meetings that might be effective and beneficial to their ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After analyzing data from our assessment tools (pre-assessments) and classroom assignments, teachers use this information to determine a specific targeted skill, differentiate instruction for ELLs according to the child’s needs, and form small groups to teach that targeted skill. Many of our ELLs who need language and support in knowledge of letters and sounds are working with the Fundations Program. When using the Response to Intervention with our ELLs, teachers work in collaboration to positively engage the ELLs with rigorous academic content and tasks. To ensure that we are building their academic skills, the core instruction is linked to building the students' prior knowledge so that it is meaningful. This will then promote academic development and academic motivation. ELLs are given differentiated activities such as hands-on activities and the use of visual aids to support them in successfully in mastering the targeted skill. Teachers increase the amount of response time during one-on-one conferencing or small group instruction and scaffold activities to benefit their understanding of the skill or task. Progress is monitored with a post-assessment as well as through conferences to identify if the ENL student has demonstrated an increase in mastery of the skill being taught. If progress is not shown teachers research other instructional methods during Teacher Team meetings that might be effective and beneficial to ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 55  Our school uses information from the EDAT and the RLAT to identify students who made progress and went up a level, as well as how students performed on each mode. After evaluating the NYSESLAT, on the kindergarten level students performed the highest in the listening modality and the lowest in the writing modality; on the first grade level students performed the highest in the reading modality and the lowest in the writing modality; on the second grade level students performed the highest in the speaking modality and the lowest in the writing and reading modalities; on the third grade level students performed the highest in the speaking modality and the lowest in the reading modality; on the fourth grade level the students performed the highest in the reading modality and the lowest in the writing modality; and in the fifth grade level the students performed the highest in the speaking modality and the lowest in the reading modality. This data informs the ENL teacher that ELLs at the entering or emerging level acquire basic reading skills with picture cues. As students move to the transitioning level they gain confidence in oral language skills and build listening comprehension. At the expanding and commanding levels, they acquire listening and oral language skills yet they still struggle in reading comprehension and writing conventions. After evaluating the EDAT, there is a trend across kindergarten, first, second, fourth, and fifth grade levels of needed improvement in writing skills. On the third grade level there is a need of improvement in reading skills. This data will help guide the ENL program to focus on improving these specific skills on the different grade levels during standalone and integrated ENL units of instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During ENL standalone and integrated units of instruction, ELLs are grouped and partnered on skill level or area of concern from each mode of language (listening and speaking, reading and writing, and viewing and representing). Small groups or partners are adjusted when areas of concern or levels have changed based on assessments. These findings are shared with classroom teachers during congruence or grade meetings on a weekly basis. Based on the data patterns, we will scaffold instruction and determine groups for the Title III Program which prepares ELLs to reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently at P.S. 115Q the ENL program is offered and consistently parents have been requesting the ENL program. For the 2017-2018 school year 10 parents out of a total of 10 selected the ENL program on the ELL Parent Survey and Program Agreement. All of the parents opted out of the bilingual program. Last school year (2016-2017), 9 parents out of a total of 10 selected the ENL program and one parent selected the bilingual program. That student was transferred to a bilingual program in a neighboring public school. The previous school year (2015-2016), 29 parents out of a total of 29 parents selected the ESL/ENL program. The ENL program currently offered at P.S. 115Q is in alignment will all of the parent's requests and they are happy with the existing program. For integrated ENL services the ENL teacher will push into that student’s classroom for the number of mandated units as per English proficiency level. For the standalone the ENL teacher will pull-out students from their classrooms for the number of mandated units as per English proficiency level. When students are pulled out of their classroom the ENL teacher will integrate language and content instruction. The content area instruction is delivered in English with home language supports and appropriate scaffolds to acquire success in core content courses. Currently we have some heterogeneous and homogeneous groups. Our ELL program breakdown by grade level is: 7 Kindergarten students, 14 First graders, 7 Second graders, 6 Third graders, 4 Fourth graders and 3 Fifth graders (total of 41 students). Out of the 41 ELLs, 7 students are in Special Education. 38 of the ELLs are newcomers (receiving service 0-3 years) and 3 of the ELLs are receiving services for 4-6 years. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2018-19 CEP 56  c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs with the English proficiency levels Entering and Emerging will receive 1 unit of instruction in Stand-Alone ENL and 1 unit of instruction in Integrated ENL/ELA per week. ELLs with the English proficiency levels of Transitioning and Expanding will receive 1 unit of instruction in Integrated ENL/ELA per week. ELLs with the English proficiency level of Commanding will receive .5 units of instruction per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years after reaching Commanding proficiency on the NYSESLAT. The classroom teachers who have ELLs in their class are given a schedule of the times when those students will be pulled-out (stand-alone) and pushed-in (integrated) for ENL services. The teachers are aware of proficiency-levels of their ELLs. In addition, they know that Entering and Emerging ELLs will be receiving 2 units (360 minutes) a week of ENL services. Transitioning and Expanding ELL’s will be receiving 1 unit (180 minutes) a week of ENL services. Commanding ELLs will be receiving .5 units (90 minutes) of instruction per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years after reaching Commanding proficiency on the NYSESLAT. This is all required as per the CR-Part154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL program instruction is only in the English language to promote second language acquisition. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development are hands-on activities, modeling, role playing, story-telling, puppetry, music, repetition, visual aids, Total Physical Response and Choral speaking. All ELLs receive 25% support of their native language with the use of different language glossaries in math, science and social studies, different language dictionaries, and different language independent reading books. Multiple interactive English language development researched-based programs are used such as Carousel of IDEAS, Fundations and IXL. Carousel of IDEAS is an age-appropriate multi-leveled program for ELLs that is used for group instruction. It has research-based readings and language skills instructed together with innovative strategies for ELLs to encourage academic achievement. Fundations is a researched-based program that is CCSS aligned and systematically and comprehensively immerses students in phonemic awareness and word studies which contributes greatly to fluency, vocabulary development and the applications of strategies for understanding a text. IXL is a Math and Language Arts tutorial program aligned with the CCLS. This program is implemented by using engaging visuals, texts and activities to motivate students to interact and improve their math and language arts skills. The core content topics for instruction are based on what classroom teachers are implementing in content areas within alignment of the Common Core Learning Standards. What is also implemented in instruction are specific skills students need to improve based on data from authentic assessments. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards students will perform multi-step tasks that require high-order thinking which are in alignment of the CCLS. During these tasks students will learn to make connections to texts, use prior knowledge, indulge in accountable talk, use of thinking maps to create authentic writing pieces and make inferences. Some tasks will be done in small groups where students will learn to solve problems by collecting, organizing and analyzing data. Rigorous tasks will culminate in a published product such as a report, an essay, response to literature, a presentation, or a project. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We assess Spanish ELLs in their native language only when they enter the ENL program. They are administered the Spanish LAB-R, if they didn't reach a proficiency level on the NYSITELL, to assess how fluent they are in their native language. In addition, ELLs in grades 3-5 are asked if they would like the state math test in their native language and the testing coordinator is made aware of this request. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 CEP 57  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not have any SIFE ELL students this current year but if we did we would also have them attend a small group period. During this small group period, students encounter differentiated instructions in tasks using visuals and hands on activities to promote confidence in their academics of the English language. They will also participate in the Title III ENL After-School, AIS Math and/or ELA After-School, and any other After-School programs designed to improve performance in ENL, ELA and Math skills (pending budget). They are also paired with other students who can help them with specific skills in reading and writing. When a Newcomer ELL enters the school they are immediately (within the first ten days from their admit date) tested with the NYSITELL and placed in the parent's program selection choice according to their level of proficiency. ELLs are also partnered with another student who speaks the same native language as them. This is done so they are not overwhelmed by the cultural shock. In addition, many visual aids are used to elicit language development such as enrichment vocabulary building hands-on activities, using reading and writing rods, books on tape or the ipad. They also participate in the Title III ENL After-School and any other After-School programs offered. All letters for these programs are translated into their native language (if available). To prepare them to take the ELA tests, the teacher reviews practice tests so students are aware of what the test will look like. They are also taught different test taking strategies to use for reading comprehension and writing responses. Students are also encouraged to attend AIS Math and AIS ELA Before or After – School for extra help in taking the state exams. For the Developing ELLs in the ENL program they are placed in small groups and instruction is differentiated according to the student's specific needs to improve their language development through core content. If an ELL is in the ENL program for a long term (4- 6 years) they will receive an extra period of ENL of small group instruction. During this extra period they will receive targeted instruction on improving their reading and writing skills. Throughout their regularly scheduled ENL classes they will be paired with other students who can assist them in improving reading and writing skills. For Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status they will receive 2 periods a week of ENL services. In addition, it will be highly suggested they attend the AIS Math and ELA After-School programs. All ELLs receive testing accommodations such as separate location and time and a-half. Former ELLs will receive up to two years of testing accommodations such as separate location and time and a-half. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use instructional strategies and grade-level materials with ELL-SWDs that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Some instructional strategies used with academic content are differentiation, scaffolding, repetition, labeling, using thinking maps, linguistic frames, peer partnerships, and having leveled libraries. The grade-level materials we use are researched-based programs such as; Learning Well Reading Comprehension Program, Hot Dots, Building Skills Puzzles and Fundations. These programs include hands-on language activities using visual and academic content to motivate students to learn about age-appropriate topics and building their language skills. To build reading comprehension skills such as inferencing, main idea, sequencing, cause and effect, following directions, logical reasoning and predicting outcomes we implement the Learning Well Reading Comprehension board games. To encourage students to work independently on building their language skills we use the "Hot Dots" program. There are phonics flash cards with the following topics; vowels, variant vowels, consonants, blends and digraphs, reading readiness and word families. In addition, there are reading comprehension cards such as: getting the main idea, noting and recalling details, drawing conclusions and predicting outcomes, using context clues, finding the sequence, finding cause and effect and making inferences. The Basic Skills Puzzles are a fun and effective way to improve reading and language skills using visuals. This hands-on puzzle motivates students to learn homophones, homonyms, irregular plural nouns, antonyms, the alphabet, rhyming words, compounds, consonant blends and digraphs and silent consonants. Fundations will immerse students to build letter formation, tapping out sounds to build phonemic awareness and sound mastery. We also use many math manipulatives such as, pretend money (bills and coins), counting blocks, pattern blocks, analogue 2018-19 CEP 58  clocks and counting sticks. This engages students with hands-on materials, visuals and rhymes to build problem solving skills. In addition, we have books in the classroom libraries that are in different native languages within the ENL program. Our picture-flash cards are also in many different native languages for our ELLs. We also give ELLs math, science and social studies glossaries in different native languages to help build their vocabulary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by grouping our students in each grade level, pushing into the classroom, articulation with the classroom teacher and special education teacher in order to adapt and modify lessons based on students' needs. Based on their academic abilities and strengths they are flexed into general education classes. ELLs that are identified as having special needs as to hearing, visual, behavioral and learning disabilities are taken into account in the ENL program. Students with hearing and visual impairments are given preferential seating to accommodate their special needs. Students that are disruptive and have behavioral disabilities are given a behavioral chart. Students with learning disabilities are given positive reinforcement and repetition on the topic being taught with visual aids or educational interactive learning activities. To build and improve certain skills teachers conference with the students on a one on one basis. Repetition is very important to not only learning disabled students, but to all students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Since ELLs are required to take all state exams after being in a NYC school for one year, supplemental services are provided to maximize performance on these exams as well as language development. We provide translators (if needed) for ELLs when taking the Math state exam. ELLs-SWDs also receive certain testing accommodations on their I.E.P. such as separate locations, time-and-a half, double time, directions read and reread (except on ELA exams) , questions read and reread (except on ELA exams) and answers read and reread. Teachers and students, using English, also utilize Accelerated Reader and A-Z Raz-Kids in the classroom and at home to build independent reading skills and comprehension of the English language. In the English language we conduct A.I.S. after school programs, which are offered at different times of the year. We have three different A.I.S. programs: ELA, Math, and Science (pending funding). The ELA and Math A.I.S. programs are offered in the winter months and the Science A.I.S is offered in the spring months. These A.I.S. programs provide innovative strategies for ELLs to encourage their improvement in academic achievement. In addition, ELLs are encouraged to attend the ENL After-School program to have extra small-group English instruction to build their English language skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trends, we noticed that our ENL students struggled the most in the writing modality on the NYSESLAT. For the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL teacher and one classroom teacher who has a large population of ENL students in her class will be part of a study group at Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project focused on adapting units of study for English Language Learners. The ENL teacher is also attending calendar day workshops at Teachers College titled, "Develop a Toolkit of Methods to Support English Language Learners in Becoming Stronger Readers and Writers", and "Ramping Up Reading, Shared Writing, and Interactive Writing to Support Grammar and Writing Conventions for English Language Learners." For the ENL program we will also incorporate technology through the use of Promethean Boards and ipads. We will implement the Fundations Program for kindergarten and beginner ELLS which support letter and sound acquisition and fundamental knowledge of the English language system. For grades 2-5, we will incorporate Accelerated Reader to build students' reading comprehension in school and at home. In addition, we will continue to offer our Title III Program to support our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program. 2018-19 CEP 59  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of the after-school and supplemental services offered to all ELLs have equal access due to being free programs. All ELLs are invited to participate by translated letters being sent home about these programs. If the letters are not sent back the ENL teacher calls the parents using the Translation Unit to explain how important it is for their child to attend these programs and answer any questions they might have. In the English language we conduct E.S.L. and Robotics after school programs (pending funding), which are offered at different times of the year so all can have the ability to attend. The E.N.L. After School Program is offered only to ELLs providing innovative strategies for ELLs to encourage their improvement in academic achievement. The Robotics After School Program is only offered to third, fourth and fifth graders and is a fully hands-on program that integrates various learning standards in the areas of science, math, mechanics, engineering, computer programming, teamwork and management skills (pending on funding). In addition, we have a Samuel Field “Y” After School Program, which is offered to all students everyday of the week (even on days when school is closed). This program provides a well-balanced and comprehensive array of activities, homework help, and programs that support the academic, social, emotional and recreational development of school age children in the 21st century. All ELLs are offered to participate in any extracurricular activities at P.S. 115Q. We have Art, Music, Media Center and Computer classes that ELLs participate in on a weekly basis. In addition, we have Dance, Inside Broadway and Chorus/Theater classes, which are offered weekly and are followed by a performance. We also have a school basketball team, “The Bulldogs” and cheerleaders, and Ballroom Dancing offered to all 5th graders. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher uses instructional researched-based materials in the ENL program which include Reading for Comprehension Readiness series, Vocabulary Links series, Practice Exercises in Basic English series, Houghton Mifflin “Vocabulary Readers” and Houghton Mifflin “Leveled Readers”, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond (Attanasio & Associates), Longman Cornerstone, Reading Comprehension and Phonics Educational Insights, CAROUSEL of IDEAS, Learning Well Reading Comprehension, Hot Dots, Basic Skills Puzzles, IXL and Fundations. All of these researched based programs can be used during the ENL services for whole class, small group and individual instruction. In addition, we have books in the classroom libraries that are in different native languages within the ENL program. Our picture-flash cards are also in many different native languages of our ELLs. We also give ELLs math, science and social studies glossaries in different native languages to help build their vocabulary. The Reading for Comprehension Readiness provides ample opportunities to read meaningful non-fiction texts appropriate to students' levels of proficiency. Within the books the text moves from simple to complex language structures, with emphasis on vocabulary development in contexts that are meaningful to the lives of the ELLs. It allows children to be interactive with language in print-rich environments in comfortable, engaging settings. The Vocabulary Links series provides assistance in improving text to picture connection, expanding vocabulary, reading comprehension and writing mechanics. The Practice Exercises in Basic English series has direct instruction and practice with essential phonemic awareness skills. The topics that are implemented consist of Attending to Sound, Word Segmentation and Rhyming, Syllables, Phoneme Matching, Phoneme Blending and Phoneme Manipulation. This program helps all newcomer ELLs to learn to read, build vocabulary and English language skills, spell and using innovative reading strategies. Houghton Mifflin “Vocabulary Readers” is produced specifically for children who are reading below grade level. This program is designed to experience non-fiction reading through engaging visuals, vocabulary building, oral language lessons and vocabulary expansion lesson to deepen word knowledge. Houghton Mifflin “Leveled Readers” are geared to raise the achievement of each reader. The texts are diverse to adhere to flexible reading groups to strengthen independent reading, build fluency and expand reading experiences. It also allows students to apply skills and strategies at their own instructional level. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond books are on grade levels from K to 5th grade. These books are used to familiarize students with the structure of the NYSESLAT and the ELA. It has ongoing assessment activities to measure progress in attaining English language proficiency. It also helps ELLs in grades 3-5 to have an easier transition from the NYSESLAT to the ELA test. 2018-19 CEP 60  The Carousel of Ideas is an English language development program. It is an age-appropriate multileveled program for ELLs. It has research-based readings and language skills instruction together with a balance of content area readings. The Reading Comprehension and Phonics Educational Insights programs are exciting hands-on activities that engage students in strengthening their reading comprehension and phonics skills. The Learning Well Reading Comprehension board games is an innovative way to build reading comprehension skills such as inferencing, main idea, sequencing, cause and effect, following directions, logical reasoning and predicting outcomes. The "Hot Dots" program is a hands-on to encourage students to work independently on building their language skills. There are phonics flash cards with the following topic; vowels, variant vowels, consonants, blends and digraphs, reading readiness and word families. In addition, there are reading comprehension cards such as: getting the main idea, noting and recalling details, drawing conclusions and predicting outcomes, using context clues, finding the sequence, finding cause and effect and making inferences. The Basic Skills Puzzles are a fun and effective way to improve reading and language skills. This hands-on puzzle motivates students to learn homophones, homonyms, irregular plural nouns, antonyms, the alphabet, rhyming words, compounds, consonant blends and digraphs and silent consonants. The IXL tutorial program allows students to be actively engaged with building Math and Language Arts skills. In addition, this program can be utilized from home at any time with their personal username and password. This tutorial program enhances learning through interactive lessons in listening and reading in the English language and is in alignment with Go Math and the CCLS. The Fundations Program engages students by immersing them in phonemic awareness, high frequency word studies, fluency, vocabulary with visual support, handwriting and spelling interactive activities. Additionally, color printers are used to capture images to support charts and other instructional aspects of the classroom. To support instruction, Promethean Boards will be utilized for whole groups and ipads for individual students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, the student’s native language is supported by learning about their language and culture as a class. Students are asked to make connections with English words and phrases to their native language. We also have dictionaries of different languages for newcomers to help assist them in learning English. In the ENL classroom we have picture cards in multiple languages to help students increase their English vocabulary by making connections in English and their native language. We also try to assign a classmate buddy who speaks the same first language as the ENL student. In addition, we have bilingual math, science and social studies glossaries for students to use in class and to take home. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels when appropriate with their proficiency level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. In addition, many of the resources state which ages/grade level it is appropriate for including the CCLS. ELL-SWDs services and resources are adapted to correspond to their ages and grades, while being appropriate to the cognitive needs by the ENL and classroom teachers using scaffolding techniques and differentiation of instruction and resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 115Q does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs before beginning the school year the parent coordinator gives one-on- one school tours during the summer, to assimilate new students. He also gives a folder with information about the school including the demographics, rules and regulations, dismissal times and locations and his contact information. In addition, newly enrolled ELLs and parents are introduced to the ENL staff at registration. The ENL teacher also conducts a tour with the ELLs to familiarize the students with locations of important areas of P.S. 115Q, 2018-19 CEP 61  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At P.S. 115Q we do not offer language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P.S. 115Q, professional development is offered to support our school staff including assistant principals, ENL coordinators and teachers, common branch teachers of ELLs, paraprofessionals, OT/PT therapists, speech therapists, psychologists, secretaries and parent coordinators and is provided by District-wide professional development as well as by a private consultant (pending funding). The professional development plan will focus on how to support ELLs in meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards by incorporating various modalities such as visuals, videos, manipulatives, and providing concrete examples. In-house professional development will focus on collaborative planning time between ENL staff and classroom teachers. In addition, ENL teachers share their knowledge and best practices to teaching ELLs during "Share Day" professional meetings. On a monthly basis teachers of ELLs participate in District-wide professional development in order to learn tools and strategies to help ELLs complete rigorous tasks and meet the CCLS. The Office of English Language Learners and Student Support and "I Teach NYC" emails the ENL teacher of upcoming PDs on how to implement the Common Core Learning Standards with ELLs. The ENL teacher has received professional development on academic language, scaffolding writing activities and text complexity which support students in meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. This year Teachers College is offering a study group on how to adapt the units of study for English Language Learners as well as calendar day workshops focused on supporting ENL students with grammar and writing conventions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 115 meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 of which 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50 % of total hours for ENL teachers by offering professional development opportunities to all school staff members during Professional Development "Share Days" on Monday afternoons, Vertical Team meetings, and Common Preps. ENL teachers will attend and /or receive through the turn-key process professional development from the District. These professional development events will include different strategies to assist staff members in the development of language acquisition of academic language through content instruction for ELLs and best practices and strategies for co-teaching. During Professional Development/Non-Attendance days, time is set aside for teachers to share and turn-key professional development training. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept by the teachers for the grade level and vertical teams. School administrators keep record of the school-wide professional development meetings in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 62  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas during the Tuesday Parent Engagement sessions. If interpretation and translation is needed, our in-house translators will also attend these individual meetings or the Translation Unit will be utilized. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In the school community there are many services provided for our ELL students and their parents. At the beginning of the school year each grade hosts a Curriculum Orientation meeting. Parents meet with their children’s teachers and are informed about what their child would be learning during the year as well as the expectations of the grade. There are also 2 to 4 ENL parent workshops a school year giving parents different strategies and handbooks to help their children at home in learning English. To help the parents in understanding these workshops, we have translators available that speak Spanish, Chinese (Cantonese or Mandarin), Punjabi, Hindi, Urdu, Bengali and Arabic. Parents of ELLs are also encouraged to attend a session of the Title III ENL after-school program. We also promote an Adult ENL workshop offered at P.S. 26 and at The Queens Library. Parents are also encouraged to attend weekly Parent Workshops, monthly Family Day Events, monthly PTA/Student of the Month meetings, monthly Virtue of the Month Assemblies and SLT meetings. Additionally, grade specific and ENL Newsletters are sent home monthly to inform parents what educational activities will take place that month for their child and any important information such as, helpful educational websites or important meetings or workshops being held that month. The parent coordinator has a distribution email list to contact parents about up-coming school and district-wide workshops, parent calendar and parent newsletter . Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Danielle Laporte, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The James J. Ambrose School School DBN: 26Q115 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Danielle LaPorte Kristal Tang Kevin Burke Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Danielle Keller ENL/Bilingual Teacher Grace Marcos Parent NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q115 School Name: The James J.Ambrose Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kevin Danielle Burke Keller Parent Coordinator Yes ENL Teacher/Coordinator No No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The student population of P.S. 115Q is made up of different Indian, Spanish, and Asian dialects. To find out the preferred language of the parents, for both written and oral communication, we looked at the data on the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and on the Ethnicity Form. Every child has to have these forms on record as of their first day of school. The data from the HLIS is recorded into ATS and a copy of each survey is filed in the main office to maintain whether the parent requires language assistance. In addition, on the student emergency contact cards, the parents preferred language for both written and oral communication is indicated. To increase the level of communication, notices from the ENL program that are sent home are translated into Punjabi, Urdu, Bengali, Hindi, Spanish, Chinese and other Indian dialects when possible. All forms have the English and their native language translations to ensure interpretation of the information. School-wide notices are stamped with a translation of "Important Notice. Please get translated.", in the languages mentioned above. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Chinese (any) Cantonese French Gujarati Hindi Korean Mandarin Marathi Malayalam English Punjabi Sinhalese Spanish Thai Urdu 5 63 0 1 0 11 20 0 1 4 716 9 2 12 1 2 0.59 7.44 0 0.12 0 1.3 2.36 0 0.12 0.47 84.53 1.06 0.24 1.42 0.12 0.24 5 61 1 1 1 14 20 4 1 5 704 11 2 13 1 3 0.59 7.2 0.12 0.12 0.12 1.65 2.36 0.47 0.12 0.59 83.12 1.3 0.24 1.53 0.12 0.35 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families HLIS Home Language Identification Survey First Time Admits Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE's translated forms are downloaded from intranet and printed immediately. 2018-19 CEP 67  E.N.L Parent Orientation Invite September 2018 and October 2018 E.N.L. Parent Notification Letters Within the first 10 days of a new admit Parent-Teacher Conferences September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, and May 2019 E.N.L. After- School Program Invites/Permission slips October 2018, January 2019, and April 2019 Parent Meetings to E.N.L. After-School December 2018, March 2019, and June 2010 ENL Parent Workshops December 2018, January 2019, and May 2019 Family Day Events October2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, April 2019, and May 2019 Multi-Cultural Events May 2019 Virtue of the Month Assembly November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. DOE's translated forms are downloaded from the intranet and printed immediately. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. Documents are translated by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit or an in-house bilingual staff member with a week turn-around. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation September 2018 interpretation service(s)? In-house bilingual staff members and the DOE's over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized for interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 68  Parent Teacher Conferences November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019 Parent Engagement meetings Weekly on Tuesday's from September 2018 through June 2019 ENL Parent Workshops December 2018, January 2019, and May 2019 In-house bilingual staff members and the DOE's over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized for interpretation services. In-house bilingual staff members and the DOE's over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized for interpretation services. In-house bilingual staff members and the DOE's over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized for interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the DOE's over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit and/or in-house bilingual staff members will be used to communicate with the limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by ensuring that limited English speaking parents are provided the opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. To meet these goals we have multiple bilingual staff members, of the prominent languages in our school, to help with one-on-one parent and teacher translations or for written translations of important documents as well as the use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit over-the-phone translations. At the beginning of September, the staff is given a document which lists the bilingual staff members with the languages they can translate and their location in the school building. In addition, the staff is given a document of how to utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit over-the-phone translations and well as written translations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At P.S. 115Q we fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations – A663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. The parents are notified of the translators available in-house by a sign posted outside the Main Office and letters which are sent home with this information. When important flyers/letters 2018-19 CEP 69  are sent home they are stamped with a translation that states, "Important Information. Please have this translated." in multiple languages. In addition, parent orientations, parent teacher conferences, E.N.L meetings/workshops, parent engagement meetings, Family Day, Multicultural Day, E.N.L. Parent Notification letters/flyers and E.N.L After-School invites/permission slips are all translated when shared with parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 115Q uses parent surveys and questionnaires to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. This information is then taken into consideration for future events. A focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school will also be created to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. 2018-19 CEP 70 
