2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q118 School Name: P.S. 118 LORRAINE HANSBERRY Principal: MICHELLE SOUSSOUDIS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Lorraine Hansberry School 29Q118 342900010118 Pre-Kindergarten - 5 School Number (DBN): 190-20 109 th Road Hollis, New York 11412 718-465-5538 718-264-9178 Phone Number: Fax: Michelle Soussoudis Msoussoudis2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Michelle Soussoudis Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: LindonDeFreitas Abigail Rodriques LindonDeFreitas DarraghJohnson n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191 Street rm. 122 Hollis, NY 11423 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7182177740 ext. 1222 7182177739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilkes FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard Queens, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-250-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Michelle Soussoudis LindonDeFreitas Abigail Rodriques DarraghJohnson Kristy DiDomenico Yvonne Gunn Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EugeniaJohnson Edwin Lewis Sharice Holley Jennifer Parrish n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At PS118Q our mission is to ensure that all children reach their maximum potential by:  Maintaining high expectations and promoting academic excellence leading toward college and career readiness. 2018-19 CEP 9   Developing and supporting a school environment where children and adults feel welcomed, respected, trusted and are integral parts of the school community.  Creating an environment where we learn together and support free exchanges of ideas and solutions.  Fostering a positive school climate that respects and values diversity and affords all students equity in the classroom and nurtures self-worth. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Lorraine Hansberry School-Public School 118Q- is a special and unique school located in the Hollis Community of Southeast Queens. Our school population is currently at 450 students ranging from Pre-Kindergarten to 5 th grade. The school population comprises 82% Black, 11% Hispanic, 1% White, and 3% Asian students. The student body includes 6% English language learners and 22% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017- 2018 was 92%. What makes PS118Q unique is that we are the only school in our area that has a Blue/Green Roof. Installing source controls on existing rooftops is an important strategy that DEP has pursed to reduce storm water runoff from entering the sewers. Rooftops comprise almost a third of New York City's total impervious surface area. Two alternatives to conventional rooftop surfaces are being tested by DEP in partnership with the Department of Education: green roofs and blue roofs. Data from the study at PS 118 will be collected to compare the storm water management performance of green, blue, and control roofs during a three-year monitoring period. Because all three surfaces will be on the same building, this pilot will compare costs and benefits under similar environmental conditions. Our school also has an ongoing partnership with Hofstra University. Hofstra’s partnership with PS118 has afforded our teachers to have ongoing professional development in mathematics, and science. Professor Stem comes to work with our teachers throughout the school year to build teacher capacity to teach science through a hands-on, exploratory approach. The same is done for mathematics. Mr. Wayne Edwards provides teachers with professional development throughout the year to enhance teachers’ pedagogy around teaching mathematics. This year, the focus will continue to surround engaging students in mathematics through a piloted program called JumpMath which focuses on building fluency. We also have a partnership with a Community Based Organization, SQPA-Southern Queens Park Association- which provides an after school programming for our students from 2:30pm-6:00pm every day. SQPA exposes students to the arts, academics, and sports. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Through assessing our data and looking at trends among the various subgroups within our school we will continue to focus on our bottom third students, students with disabilities and ENL students. These groups typically comprise our at-risk population. We are focused on building math fluency, reinforcing academic vocabulary and strengthening comprehension while reading. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS118Q has made the most progress is student achievement. We have made strong strides with closing the gap between subgroup and general education students on State exams. Our key areas of focus according the Quality Review rubrics are: ● Curriculum: (Rigorous Instruction) Increase the rigor of the academic tasks and consistently generate higher-order questions to develop critical thinking skills in the students, including English language learners and students with disabilities. Improve the process of aligning the curricula materials to pedagogy. ● Assessment: Develop a balanced and diversified assessment system which includes common assessments that are standards based and consistent across the grade, content area and school. The assessments will be purposeful and data yielded will help guide curriculum paths and teacher pedagogy. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q118 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 448 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 61 61 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 68.3% % Reduced Lunch 8.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 13.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.17 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 70% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 25 92.5% 1.1% 21.0% 79.0% 3.1% 2.2% 2 12% 6.9 27.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment in response to rigorous instruction, including classroom observations, feedback from school and district staff, an analysis of the results from the New York State ELA and math data, and the NYC School Survey indicate the need for curriculum and instruction to be designed to engage students, foster critical thinking skills, and that are aligned to the Common Core. The data shows: Strength of this element are that:  Teachers feel that the have adequate resources to plan rigorous and engaging learning outcomes and daily lessons.  The entire school community is committed to targeting math instruction to build fluency among or students.  Teachers communicate with each other. Priority areas include:  .A consistent transfer of knowledge from teacher to student that demonstrates mastery of the standards and skills in all content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in student's math fluency and ability to use data or text references to support their ideas as measured by use of on- demand written explanations and discussion prompts. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Students will be taught various strategies as to how to solve open-ended problems that require analytical and synthesis skill sets. Students will focus on composing written explanations that include appropriate structures and suitable academic language for each grade level. Students Grades K-5 in the lowest third September 2018-June , 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. Administration, Teachers, other staff members. We are implementing systemic strategies to be used in all classrooms. In addition to the school-wide curriculum selections, leveled texts from ReadWorks.org, Khan Academy Jump Math and i-ready programs will be instituted. 1. Manipulatives will be incorporated in math lessons in order to provide students that are tactile and visual learners an entry point to understand mathematical concept Jump Math Math has an online resource for teachers and students. Teachers are able to design online activities to address the needs of individual learners within their class. Students Grades K-5 in the lowest third 1. The Jump Math curriculum that we will be implementing has an RT I component to address the needs of students that are at risk, with SWD, and English Language Learners. Students are identified using ongoing assessments, conferring, and through unit performance tasks and assessments. Students Grades K-5 in the lowest third 2. The Ready Gen curriculum that the school uses has an additional component titled Ready Up!. This was purchased to address the needs of our bottom third students as well as subgroups. Teacher and parent Workshops throughout the year are utilized to teach about the NYS common Core learning standards and how they relate to the Math and English Language Arts Curriculums. Students Grades K-5 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June , 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June , 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June , 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. Administration, Teachers, other staff members. Principal, Assistant Principal, SETTS, Classroom Teachers, Math Cluster teacher, Partnership with Hofstra University, and ESL Teacher Principal, Assistant Principal, SETTS, Classroom Teachers, Math Cluster teacher, Partnership with Hofstra 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers will work collaboratively to develop high quality tasks and open-ended discussion questions to improve rigorous instruction based on assessment data. University, and ESL Teacher Administration, Teachers, other staff members. Students Grades K-5 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June , 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have developed a series of Parent interactive workshops that will take place 1 Tuesdays a month and possible Saturdays based on parent interest that will review skills and strategies that the students are working on at home so that they can familiar and assist their child at home with their learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources that will be leveraged to meet our goals include instructional materials from Rally, Curriculum Associates, Engage New York , Max Scholar, Imagine Learning, Flocabulary, XtraMath, ReadWorks, Science Fusion and Passport, etc. to support our Jump Math and ReadyGen Curriculums. In addition, we will also utilize our Achievers after school Academy and Generation Success after school program to provide additional support to students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in student's fluency and ability to use data or text references to support their ideas as measured by use of on- demand written explanations and discussion prompts. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) On-demand written explanations and i-ready data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A comprehensive assessment in response to supportive environment, including OORS reports, feedback from students, school, and district personnel, NYC School Survey, and 2017-2018 School Snapshot indicate the need for the school to enhance a culture where students are taught to advocate for themselves. The data shows: Strength:  Based on the School Snapshot, 97% of teachers say that the students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, and cafeteria.  Although a Student Council existed in the past, students will increase their voice to help develop initiatives to enhance the culture of the school.  92% students feel it is important to come to school everyday to learn. Priority :  Moving more students into a least restrictive environment and teaching children to be more vocal about their personal well-being. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% decrease of student infractions as measured by the OORS system. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Student Council will meet monthly with their advisers as well as administration to develop and discuss initiatives that will enhance the learning environment of the school. The Student Council representatives will then showcase their ideas to their peers during town hall meetings. Students in grades K-5 Students in collaboration with AAA, will become part of a program that will allow them to create a school safety patrol. The upperclassmen will help monitor smaller students in the halls, yard and during dismissal procedures. We also have classes that assist our lower grades when exiting the building during evacuation drills. Parents have been signing up with the Parent Coordinator to volunteer during the school day in the lunchroom as well as during special events. Having parents visible during the day will help lower student incidents due to more adult supervision. Students in grades K-5 in the lowest third which includes ELL and students with disabilities Students in grades K-5 in the lowest third which includes ELL and students with disabilities The school news letter will help inform students, staff, and parents of important events and incentives that will build our communication and therefore enhance our environment. Students in grades K-5, Staff, Parents Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff, Student Council October 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff, Student Council, School Monitors, AAA 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, Principal, Assistant Principal,Staff, Parents Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff, Student Council members and School newspaper columnists. 2018-19 CEP 18  The school will develop a series of initiatives along side the student council to enhance student engagement and responsibility in and around the school building, resulting in improved respect for each other, our facilities Students in grades K-5, Staff, Parents 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff, Student Council members and School newspaper columnists. October 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold town hall meetings every other month as well as give updates during PTA meetings every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources that will be leveraged to meet our goals include scheduled time to meet with Student Council members, planning Town Hall meetings, working with AAA and the use of Title I funds to create the school newspaper, and posters and signs that will display the new school initiatives developed in conjunction with the Student Council. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have a 10% decrease in infractions as measured by OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reporting system data reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment in response to collaborative teaching, including the School Quality Snapshot, discussions with and feedback from school personnel, the School Leadership Data Subcommittee indicate the need for teachers to participate in opportunities to develop, grow, and contribute to the continuous improvement of the school community. The data shows: Strength:  92% of teachers say that they work together to design instructional programs.  97% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. Priority:  To get 100% of teachers to take responsibility for improving the school. Current data reflects 76%.  To get all teachers eager to try new ideas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an integration of using assessment data to lesson plan and drive instruction measured by a 10% increase in Advance Danielson indicators 1E, 3C and 3D . 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly grade level and inquiry meetings focused on student work and the level of rigor within the instructional core. This will include vertical alignment meetings as well. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades K-5 including lowest third and all subgroups September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers and Grade leaders Common assessments across the grade and school including unit assessments, benchmarks, MOSL exams. Grades K-5 Teachers will use technology and i-ready resources to differentiate instruction. Teachers will participate in professional development cycles that focus on planning, common assessment, using data to improve instruction and looking at student work Grades K-5 including lowest third and all subgroups Teachers 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers and Grade leaders Teachers Teachers, Professional Development Team; Instructional committee, Assistant Principal & Principal 2018-19 CEP 22  Teachers will create TIP sheets and resources to help parents with concepts taught in school to assist with the work at home. Teacher teams will utilize inquiry protocols to analyze student work to improve mathematical fluency/ problem solving and writing performance across all content areas Teachers will use assessment cycle (Pre-diagnostic/ Formative/ Summative) data to enhance teaching methods and student outcomes. Parents Teachers Teachers 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Teachers Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. September 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will create TIP sheets and resources to help parents with concepts taught in school to assist with the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal our professional development committee will create a menu of professional development opportunities that teachers will participate in each Monday in an effort to provide time for productively working on instructional designs. Professional development topics will be decided by the committee representatives. 2018-19 CEP 23  We will utilize the expertise among the staff to facilitate professional learning opportunities and invite outside professional staff developers to present quality PD to staff members. Tuesday professional work time will be used for inquiry work, assignments aligned to our educational school goals and/ professional reading and discussion. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress toward our goal through our informal and formal observations, walk-thrus, professional conversations, and feedback. By February of 2019 we will review teacher evaluations in ADVANCE to monitor teacher ratings in Questioning and Discussion, Assessment of student learning, and Designing Coherent Instruction. Level of student engagement will be monitored continuously through the aforementioned tools. We will monitor teacher creation of rigorous tasks through review of lesson plans and instructional activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be Advance ratings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of strength include a willingness for School leaders to collaborate with all stakeholders ; knowledgeable in developing and executing professional development that yield an increase in student learning and encourages feedback from all constituents. Areas of improvement include participating in teacher teams more often, encouraging teachers to develop more of the instructional materials that we utilize. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will increase one level in Danielson domain 1 as measured by Advance. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Communicate on a weekly basis to staff through email, memorandums, planning sessions and conversations. Provide differentiated professional learning opportunities. Coordinate more planning time to develop instructional materials. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and Assistant Principal. Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional and Professional Development Committee members. Principal, Assistant Principal, and Effective rated teachers. Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Provide formal and informal communication methods by providing meaningful feedback on ADVANCE reports. Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review Principal and Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 26  Provide teachers an opportunity to attend outsourced professional development sessions and turn-key the information to colleagues. School administration in collaboration with the Instructional and Professional Development committees will create and implement a series of learning activities that expand teacher aptitudes in standards-based lesson planning and engaging students in learning techniques Administration and teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teachers every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Principal, Assistant Principal and teachers. Principal, Assistant Principal and teachers. Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will create TIP sheets and resources to help parents with concepts taught in school to assist with the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to be successful at this goal, we will need to plan effective Monday professional developments, utilize PD from the FSCs as well as our own meaningful cycles. Set aside money for substitutes will need to be scheduled to cover teachers to attend PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feburary 2019, teachers will increase a half level in Danielson domain 1 as measured by Advance.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment in response to Strong Family and Community Ties, including School Quality Snapshot, feedback from school personnel and parents, PTA attendance records, parent survey return rates indicate the need for the school to form effective partnerships with families and outside organizations to improve the school. The data shows: Strength:  99% of parents say that school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand  100 % of teachers say that teachers work closely with families to meet student needs Priorities: In a school of 450 students, only 20 – 30 parents attended monthly PTA meetings   68% of families said that they had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in PTA meeting attendance as measured by parent attendance logs. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly school-community events that relate to our children and state of our school community. Student of the month assemblies will also be correlated around PTA meeting times. Parents and School Community Parent Workshops Parents and School Community Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Event Planning Team, and Parent Coordinator, PTA Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, and Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. School Calendar and School Newsletter School Messenger Calls and backpacked memos Open School Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, & monthly open houses. We will also offer one Saturday conference to meet the work schedules of our parents if of high interest . Parents and School Community Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review every 10 weeks. Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Student Council and newspaper columnists, and Parent Coordinator, 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. Sept. 2018-June 2019 with a review Parents and School Community Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Event Planning Team, and Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 30  every 10 weeks. 11/10/18, 1/26/19, 4/20/19 and 6/20/19. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The CBO- SQPA often creates activities for the parents to come and celebrate the children's efforts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan we will continue to forge relationships with local community members with the assistance of the parent coordinator, event planning team, and the Parent/Teacher Association. Title I,III and parent coordinator funds will be utilized for this outreach effort. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in PTA meeting attendance as measured by parent attendance logs Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. attendance logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades 4 & 5 receiving a level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA state exam. Students in grades K-3 that are not on the appropriate reading level for the grade. Also K-5 students that score below grade level on beginning year assessments Students in grades 3,4 & 5 receiving a level 1 or 2 on the NYS Mathstate exam. Also K-5 students that score below grade level on beginning year assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) SETSS , RTI, After School Academy, ELL The method for delivery with all of SETSS and Flexible/ Differentiation After School Academy, and Flexible Grouping, Max Scholar Reading Support Program, and Flocabulary, ReadyGenUp!,ReadWorks.org Supplemented reading program these programs will be small group and some will be one to one/tutoring SETSS, After School Academy, Flexible Groupingand the The method for delivery with all of grouping will take place during the school day. The After School Academy, and the ELL After School Academy will take place after the school day SETSS and Flexible/ Differentiation EngageNY,JumpMathandRTI component these programs will be small group and some will be one to one/tutoring. grouping will take place during the school day. The After School Academy, and ELL After School Academy Science Emphasis is placed on Grade 3 and 4 students. After School Science Academy-PS118Q Science Prep Program The method of delivery is within a small Flexible grouping and differentiation is group setting. will take place after the school day This will take place after the school day. 2018-19 CEP 32  provided. Social Studies Same criteria applied to ELA. We will be using an Inquiry based program from Passport. Flexible grouping and differentiation is The method of delivery is within a whole to smallgroup setting This will take place during the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Services are established by the SBST and the students IEP provided The guidance counselor providescounseling sessions for the at riskstudents. The social worker meets with the at risk students and when necessary,their families. The guidance counselor has small group All counseling sessions occur during the and one to one sessions with her school day students. The social work provides mostly one to one sessions. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 42 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We offer at-risk counseling and provide additional assistance through our partnership with ThriveNY. We provide school supplies and uniforms. All trip fees are covered by the school to attend teacher planned learning extensions. Teachers also provide small group tutoring during lunch periods when necessary. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. HQT are recruited via DOE pages, Teaching program collaborations and district recommendations. All staff is encouraged to attend outsourced professional developments. HQTs are also enrolled in FSC and Central professional developments that enhance their teaching pedagogy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school developed a comprehensive professional development plan that addresses CCLS, Danielson, our instructional focus and school-wide goals. Professional development opportunities are also differentiated based on the needs of groups of teachers and grade bands. Our high quality professional development will include but not be limited to the following: ● Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities conducted by instructional lead teachers, Principal, and Assistant Principal in the content areas of ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and how Danielson can support teaching practices in content areas. ● Any staff member will attend workshops relating to CCLS and Danielson. They will turnkey the information and deliver workshops after school or Lunch and Learns to teachers and paraprofessionals in the use of DOK, Essential questions, ongoing assessment practices in order to increase best practices to increase academic rigor in literacy, math, science and social studies. ● Implementation of the Core Curriculum Ready Gen for ELA and Jump Math will be supported through high quality professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals delivered by school instructional leaders, and outside educational consultants. Teacher teams will be trained in how to use data effectively to develop flexible groups, track student performance trends and elevate programs and strategies in order to monitor and revise their practices. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). As a neighborhood school we will enroll students from zoned neighborhoods. We will continue our Pre-K to K Transition Team including the Principal, AP, School Counselor, IEP Teacher, the pre-k/k teachers,Pre-k coordinator and parents (if applicable) who will work collaboratively to assist preschool children as they transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. The team will meet monthly to track student data trends and evaluate overall readiness. Eligible students will be provided with early intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, Pre-K teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten. To ensure seamless transitions, the expectation is that our Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers will engage in collaborations regarding CCLS for Early Childhood grades. Our school members will embrace our parents through parent engagement activities to increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen our parents’’ understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. The topics of discussion selected for the monthly open houses were designed for that purpose. The Pre-K-to-K Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the progress and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood Pre-K program to the Kindergarten elementary school program based on review of the Pearson work sampling products produced in Pre-k. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL team attended Central professional development sessions to continue to learn about MOSL and the ADVANCE teacher evaluation system. The MOSL team reviewed all assessment options and selected the option that best suits the needs of our students with alignment to the CCLS. Professional development was scheduled to provide information regarding the use of MOSL assessments and ADVANCE to improve instruction. In addition to MOSL, our 2018-19 CEP 37  school uses several appropriate assessment measures such as common pre and post unit assessments, and common formative assessments. Teacher Teams look at student work and track student performance trends to establish flexible grouping and to provide scaffolds and extensions to accelerate student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) $241,054 $119,421 0 $3,295 $3,066,174 X X X X x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) A-E A-E A-E A-E A-E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 118Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 118Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 118Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time effectively and efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; parent workshops I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In the last 2 years, our ELL population has increased. Fifty percent of the ELLs are at the Entering or Emerging levels in English proficiency, according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Data also indicates that these students need improvement in their productive language skills, which include speaking and writing. This also includes our ELLs in Special Education. State and school assessment data also indicates that our ELLs, including those in Special Education, need support in literacy and math. The program is scheduled for Tuesdays and Wednesdays, from 2:30p.m. until 5:00p.m., for approximately eight weeks. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will provide training centered around developing literacy and math skills with additional support in academic language. Training will also equip our teachers who instruct ELLs in their classrooms with various strategies of instruction that are aligned with the Common Core Curriculum. The ENL teacher shares different scaffolding and mapping strategies to be used in the students' classroom. These sessions focus on professional practice and methodologies that can strengthen language and content area instruction across the curriculum. We have designed a professional development program that will prepare teachers to better serve the linguistically diverse population at our school. The teachers that receive training are the ENL teachers, and content area teachers and special education teachers who teach ELLs in their classrooms. The professional development program is scheduled approximately once every six weeks since the first Monday of the 2018-2019 school year. CTLE PD agendas are maintained in the school office along with attendance sheets and any documents that were shared with the staff. Pd sessions are 80 minutes long. The workshops help teachers align lesson plans to meet language objectives and multiple entry points that are required to engage all learners. The ENL teachers attend FSC trainings, Imagine learning and privatized workshops in order to turnkey pertinent information to the rest of the staff. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement is an important component in our after school program. Title III funds will be used to offer additional parent workshops to our ELL parents. During these workshops curriculum and strategies will be presented and explained for ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Parents will be equipped with strategies they can use at home to assist their children to be successful in all content areas. The ENL teacher, the school's parent coordinator, and other instructional support specialists will be present. Translation will be available at the parent workshops through various staff members who speak the parents' home languages. Parents will also be notified through school newsletters in their home language. The workshops are provided by the ENL teacher in conjunction with the content area teachers. They are scheduled every four weeks on Saturdays, from 9:00 a.m. until 11:00 a.m., for approximately six months. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Staff professional development is included in the purchase of the software program. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a n/a n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 CEP 49 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Imagine Learning software has been purchased as a District 29 pilot program to specifically address English language acquisition for our ELL populations. n/a n/a n/a Educational Software (Object Code 199) 3,295 Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a 3,295 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name The Lorraine Hansberry School Borough Queens School Number 118 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michelle Soussoudis Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Claudia Becerra Teacher/Subject Area Dana DiPreta Teacher/Subject Area Sheila Robinson Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Lezli Buchanan Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent n/a Parent Coordinator Pria Bala Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) Velda Armstrong_Guidance C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 484 2018-19 CEP 51 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs are: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data from these assessments enables the ENL teacher, in collaboration with the classroom teachers, to continue, rethink, or adjust the instructional content, strategies, or activities to meet the academic and language goals of the ELLs. Each marking period there is a mid period progress review as well as an end term portfolio review. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 52  The NYSESLAT is given to our ELLs during the spring to identify their progress and areas of need. The students are also Performance tasks as the school-based Measurement of Student Learning (MOSL) at the beginning and at the end of the school year to identify a baseline, progress, and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The data from these assessments provide information relevant to how the school's instructional plan is implemented, with the appropriate differentiations and accommodations for ELLs. The ENL teacher, in cooperation with the classroom teachers, creates a gradual plan for students to target areas of need and to monitor progress, making instructional adjustments as needed. The individualized intervention is identified through our imagine learning program which recognizes individual areas of mastery and focus for each student. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Ready Gen and Jump Math!, our literacy and math programs, have built-in intervention components for ELLs and other students that need additional support. Our school also uses i-ready, max scholar and imagine learning. The software programs identify specific skill deficiencies for each individual learner, thus allowing us to flexibly group students for improved learning. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and the Mathematics and English Language Arts state exams, are used to evaluate and inform our ENL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings in the data provide an evaluation of our ELLs' mastery of content and language. The information is used to drive instruction and to make the necessary adjustments in our program to meet the academic needs of our students. The ENL teacher, in collaboration with the classroom teachers, also analyzes the data and comes to a decision as to which specific areas our students are strong in and which need additional reinforcement, and plans accordingly. Teachers use Tuesday after school time and common prep periods to review student work. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program at P.S. 118 for the year 2017-2018 school year is a combination Push-in and Pull-out program. The pull-out program students travel as a group to the ENL classroom. The students are grouped by one or two grade levels, and are in mixed proficiency levels. However, majority of our current Ells (over 50%) are beginning/ emergent. The push-in program students that are serviced are grouped by grade in the same classroom, therefore, the ENL teacher provides the service in their classroom. They are a heterogeneous group. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 53  c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ELLs are serviced by a certified ENL teacher. The Entering and Emerging English proficiency level students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. The Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Our Commanding level students (tested-out), continue to receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. The ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers and other support staff to plan a program that allows her to meet all targets. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program is aligned with the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher is in continuous contact with the classroom teachers and is familiar with the standards and the material being taught at each grade level. The ENL teacher uses each grade's monthly Unit of Study to plan instruction for the ELLs. The ENL teacher also prepares the appropriate and necessary scaffolding materials and methods to go with the specific content area and specific unit being taught. The ENL teacher also gives explicit instruction on specific academic vocabulary to support and ensure content area and learning. Most instruction is given in English, some students receive dual language support (Spanish). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher and the test coordinators ensure that all ELLs in grades 3 -5 receive content area standardized tests in their native language, if available. In addition, Ells are provided translated glossaries and word for word dictionaries when tested. Also, during formative assessments, Entering and Emerging level students are able to respond in their home language to demonstrate learning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A special academic program is developed for any SIFE students entering our school. The intervention usually consists of attending Fundations lessons given by a certified teacher. Other literacy programs are also provided to students. For our newcomers who have been in US schools less than 3 years our program consists of academic rigor and explicit ENL and ELA instruction. All ELLs receive intensive, Common Core Standards driven instruction in all areas of the curriculum. All content area lessons are differentiated to meet students' needs. The ENL teacher scaffolds academic language to support students' participation and progress in those areas. The ENL teacher gives explicit instruction in the use of of the language functions and structures within the context of the lesson. The ENL program in our school is aligned with the school curriculum for each grade level. In addition, all newcomers are encouraged to attend the Title III, and/or specialized summer school program. ELLs who have been receiving ENL services for 4 to 6 years are usually at the Advanced or Proficient level in Speaking and Listening based on the NYSESLAT. They are given intensive instruction in reading and writing, as well as more scaffolding and support in assignments that are part of the Common Core Standards. This is done through intensive collaboration between all instructional staff who service them. Former ELLs are provided with push-in ENL instruction in their classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 54  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development, ENL strategies are used by the ENL teacher and the classroom/content area teachers. This is the reason for structuring the ENL program as push-in and pull-out. The strategies include scaffolding, activating and building prior knowledge, using hands-on activities, use of graphic organizers, visual representations, pre-reading strategies and the use of tiered vocabulary words. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs receive all services as per their IEPs. At the beginning of the school year, all service providers meet to coordinate scheduling as to avoid conflict, so student will receive all necessary services. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers, providing support which targets specific skills. These ELLs also receive extra instruction during our extended day program. They are also being pulled-out in small groups by the SETSS program and receive instruction in Math and ELA. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The implementation of the Title III After-School program, and the Extended Day program provide targeted intervention opportunities for students in grades 2,3,4, and 5. Some of our students get extra help by being pulled out by the SETSS program as "At Risk". Our after-school program consists of 4 hours per week where students are grouped according to grade level. RTI services are built into our daily program. Each week, there is a content of focus that addresses skills in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, our school will be working with a new program specifically for our ELL population called imagine learning. It contains a dual language component. We also will be using a new Social Studies (Passport) and Science (Fusion) curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in all aspects of the school activities. Our 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students are given the opportunity to participate in the test preparation after school programs. Our after school ELL program will be open for all of our ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. This year the instructional materials to support ELLs include materials in a variety of genres and disciplines in different proficiency levels. The ENL and classroom teachers are using the ELL component in the Ready Gen and the Go Math! curriculum. Our ELLs also have access to computers in their classroom and in the ENL classroom. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in their language are provided when needed. Books in students' home language are also available for students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 55  Native language support is utilized during lessons and during exams. Our students are provided with dictionaries and glossaries during ENL periods, as well as in their classrooms. The ENL classroom has books in different languages as part of the students' library corner. All communication with parents of ELLs is conducted both in English and in their home language. The new imagine learning program has a dual language component that has helped us be very strategic when identifying best strategies to support our students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services instruction, support, and resources correspond to the age/grade through the content and text complexity of some of the resource materials. Dual language books, glossaries, dictionaries, hands-on manipulatives, audio/visual materials, and computer programs are also available in various proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the inception of registration, the Parent coordinator, guidance counselor, ENL teacher, office staff as well as any and all available administrators greet and assist the parent in any way needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends workshops given by the Queens South Field Support Center (QSFSC) of the New York City DOE on a regular basis. The workshops focus on instruction to ELLs aligned with the Common Core Language standards. The ENL teacher then provides a workshop for all staff members during Monday professional development time. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL and the classroom teachers attend workshops pertaining to ELLs offered by the Department of Education throughout the year. Copies of the offering and agenda are held by the office staff. The teacher who attended then is responsible 2018-19 CEP 56  for providing workshops to all teachers equipping them with strategies to teach ELLs that align with the Common Core Curriculum. These workshops are done during Monday's Professional Development time. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher has individual meetings or phone conversations with parents of ELLs throughout the year to discuss student progress, concerns, or assessment results. The ENL teacher is able to speak with the Spanish speaking parents because she is bilingual in that language. For the other languages, the ENL teacher requests the help of other staff members that speak that specific language to translate in order to communicate with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL families are invited to ENL events coordinated by the school district or the Department of Education. The Family ELL Night hosted by the Queens South Field Support Center targeted for parents of English Language Learners, for example, was given a few evenings this year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michelle Soussoudis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Lorraine Hansberry School School DBN: 29Q118 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michelle Soussoudis Title Principal Lezli Buchanan Assistant Principal Pria Bala Parent Coordinator Claudia Becerra ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent Sheila Robinson Teacher/Subject Area Dana DiPreta Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Velda Armstrong School Counselor Beverly Mitchell n/a n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/17 11/17 11/17 11/17 0000 11/17 11/17 0000 0000 11/17 11/17 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q118 School Name: Lorraine Hansberry School Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Pria Bala Parent Coordinator Claudia Becerra ENL teacher yes no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents are surveyed at registration as to what language they would like the school to communicate with them. At registration and in the initial parent orientation in September parents are given a questionnaire asking them to fill out the language they prefer to get information in. Every teacher, including cluster teachers has access to the list of parents who need translations in communicating with them. In addition, there is note on the emergency card as well if the parent can only communicate in another language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 60  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral At our school, English is the dominant language, 436 Spanish Haitian Creole Arabic Bengali Urdu 38 9 5 2 2 88.62% 434 88.21% 7.93% 1.83% 1.22% .41% .41% 7.72% 1.83% 1.02% .41% .41% 39 9 6 2 2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families -Registration docs Aug-Sept, ongoing -Welcome letters September -PTA/ PTC memos -School newsletters -State exam calendars -Trip slips Monthly Monthly January -Summer school info On-going basis Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We plan to make use of services such as Google translate and the interpreter hot line. Documents are printed in English and other translated languages. The ENL teacher and pupil personnel secretary then inform aides who deliver the translated letters to students in the identified classes. Staff members who are fluent/ proficient in some of our student's native languages also participate in translating for parents or teaching staff. They also make phone calls and 2018-19 CEP 61  -Promo-in-doubt letter -Parent surveys June Seasonally -Progress reports Feb-April 1 per term n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a assist parents during registration periods, PTC, etc. The Parent Coordinator is responsible for securing translation services written/ oral for parents that don't speak or read one of our more common languages. n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher Night September P.T.C. Sept., Oct, Mar., May P.T.A Monthly I.E.P./ Service meetings As scheduled interpretation service(s)? Staff members will speak in our most dominate language. Documents will be available in those languages as well. The Parent Coordinator is always available to secure additional translation services for our parents. Parents will have to request interpreter services ahead of date so that we can request staff members and the translator hot line for conference calls. Agendas will be provided in multiple languages as well as additional services provided through the parent coordinator. Staff members who are fluent can assist with translation. The Parent Coordinator or school psychologist secures translator services in advance of the scheduled meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will be working with our school messenger service to provide access to messages in multiple languages. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor regulations including A-663 are disseminated during September PD and we review expectations including the importance of building and maintaining home to school relationships which include multiple modes of communication. This is reviewed throughout the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the entrance to the school there is a big notice with the Parents' Bill of Rights both in English and in Spanish. They receive the school memos in their home language and pamphlets explaining the availability of the translation services. The parent coordinator also reiterates this information during monthly workshops and parent outreach phone calls. The ENL teacher also holds meetings with our ELL parents to review their rights as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? This year, will will make better use of Google and survey monkey services to keep the pulse of our parents. The ENL teacher also holds meetings where she discusses parent needs and involvement. This information is shared with administration to make necessary changes where needed. 2018-19 CEP 63 
