2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 27Q123 P.S. 123 Principal: ANTHONY HOOKS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 123 Queens 342700010123 PreK- 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q123 145-01 119 th Avenue South Ozone Park New York 11436 718-529-4300 718-529-4290 Phone Number: Fax: Anthony M. Hooks ahooks@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Anthony M. Hooks Virginia Nunez Loretta Surrency Tanyia Hector Loretta Surrency n/a n/a District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Room 420, Ozone Park, NY 11416 MBarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park NY 11417 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 520-6743 Phone Number: (718) 281-3259 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony M. Hooks Viginia Nunez Loretta Surrency Clarissa Murray Tanyia Hector Charkena Harris *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission Our mission is to maintain a school culture that enables students to achieve high standards, both academically and socially, while promoting cultural awareness. We will provide students with challenging educational experiences using 2018-19 CEP 9  Science, Technology, Arts, Math, Engineering, Music, and Athletics. These engaging experiences will prepare students for college and career readiness skills for the 21 st Century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 123 is an elementary school with 709 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 55% Black, 20% Hispanic, 2% White, 8% Native American and 10% Asian students. The student body includes 6% English Language Learners and 20% Students with Disabilities. Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The average attendance rate for the school year is 93%. Progress P.S. 123 implements a standards-based curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that integrates the instructional shifts and promotes higher order thinking skills for a diverse group of learners. As mentioned in the School Quality Guide, P.S. 123 has a rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the CCLS. The resources are also aligned to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. Programs During the 2017-18 school year, PS123Q has strategically instituted new initiatives with Reading Rescue, Universal Literacy, Max Scholar, Moby Max and Mathletics in an effort to address the needs of the Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners as well as the students who are below standard (Tier 2 and 3 students). These programs provide one to one supports for students as well as small group work focused on individual academic needs through the use of technology and the arts. Challenges With the use of student-led conferences we saw a large increase in parent participation. We understand the challenge of getting parents to become more involved and we are therefore extending the student led conferences and increasing the variety of workshops being offered to parents. Key areas of Focus P.S. 123 is continuing to deepen scaffolding of instruction strategically through the use of multiple entry points and supports to ensure that all learners are provided with consistent learning experiences that extend and push their thinking resulting in improved student work products. P.S. 123 is extending the school’s assessment process to include the careful review of data at inquiry team meetings to identify trends in student performance where curricula is revised to address the needs of students including Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  In the past two years, there has been an increase in the number of students from Guiana. Many of these students have gaps in their education and therefore need additional supports. We also have an increasing Special Education population with almost 20% of our students receiving special education services. Many students are in self contained or integrated co-teaching classes and there are a large amount of students who require speech services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-18 school year, PS123Q showed the greatest progress in Supportive Environment as a result of implementing a strong character education program and introducing a rewards program. Some of the programs included "My brothers Keeper, School violence and prevention program, and outside vendors who focused on bullying. These efforts resulted in a tremendous decrease in the number of disciplinary incidents in our school. Although we need to continue to focus on increasing Parent and Community Involvement, during the 2017-18 there was a large jump in parent participation as a result of introducing the student led conferences in the classroom as well as many additional community activities. Another area which made progress was the students in grades 3-5 meeting proficiency increased 8% in ELA and 7% increase in proficiency levels for Math from 2016 to 2017. For the 2018-19 school year, we are focusing on the 2 elements, Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. As indicated in the most recent Principal Performance Review, "It was evident that there was teacher dominance in many classrooms," and therefore we are looking to set up model classrooms and inter-visitations to build best practices. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q123 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 688 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 56 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 79.2% % Reduced Lunch 6.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 8.6% 21.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.1 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 40.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 66 91.9% 6.3% 18.9% 55.1% 11.9% 9.0% 4 0% 8.1 36.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES NO N/A N/A NO YES NO N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from the most recent Principal Performance Observation (PPO) was, "Continue to deepen school-wide instructional practices through the strategic evaluation of teacher planning to ensure that teachers routinely plan and implement academic tasks with strategic scaffolds so that all learners can engage in appropriately challenging tasks that promote high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion." Unfortunately, the majority of students are not meeting the standards on New York standardized tests. Specifically, only 30% of students met the standards on the most recent NYS math exam, which was up 7% from the previous year. The Superintendent also indicated that, Data was analyzed to support school-wide improvement in efforts in mathematics. Goals were established in collaboration with the SLT along with several members of the teaching staff that specializes in ELLs and SWDs." The Principal is encouraging teachers to ensure that academic tasks are engaging for students such as the use of real world problems in problem solving in mathematics. Units and tasks are focused on building skills across all grades for all students, including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities.. Since the math curriculum is very rigorous and challenging for students, we are providing additional supports during the regular school day and after school. The use of manipulatives and technology in Think Central provides individualized activities to support support students in their areas of need and push them to the next level. PS123 utilizes the Go Math beginning of year assessments to identify students' strengths and needs. Based on the result, teachers scaffold instruction and group students according to their levels. Many students are having difficulty grasping the higher level of problems they are facing in mathematics. Therefore, our priority need is is to improve students' math performance on classroom and state assessments by developing math skills from when they enter the school through the ue of hands on activities and differentiated activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers implementing targeted math instruction, 80% of students will increase on the end of year Go Math assessment compared to the beginning of year assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Benchmark students math levels during the 2018-2019 school year using Go Math assessment at least 3 times during the course of the year and use these results for planning and providing support for students. K-5 students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals Use of scaffolding instruction strategies from Go Math. K-5 students Sept. 2018- Teachers Teachers review data at grade meetings and plan strategies to address student deficits. June 2019 K-5 students Sept. 2018- Coaches June 2019 Teachers Additional remediation will be provided for students during the school day, after school and Saturdays. K-5 students Sept. 2018- AIS providers June 2019 Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs) will be provided with focused support based upon need in small groups. SWDs ELLs Classroom teachers Principal Assistant Principals Sept. 2018-June 2019 Special Education teachers ENL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September, parents will be invited to attend the Meet the Teacher Night. At that meeting, parents will be informed of the expectations for their children for the school year. Teachers will meet with parents on Tuesdays, parent/teacher conferences and as needed to discuss students' needs. Parent workshops will be provided on expectations and math curriculum so that parents can build their understanding of Common Core math standards and can support their children at home. These will take place 2018-19 CEP 15  throughout the year and also at 4 of the 10 PA meetings. Teachers will set up individual meetings with parents to discuss student progress Parents are invited to attend student-led conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Go Math curriculum, Think Central, hands-on manipulatives. Per Session for workshops and after-school programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of K-5 students will increase on Go Math Mid-Year assessment compared to the beginning of year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Baseiine and benchmark Go Math assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, the news reports an increase in the number and level of student generated altercations and bullying. Students read about these terrible occurrences and are impacted. In an effort to increase positive behavior, monthly assemblies provided students with incentives for good behavior leading to reduced incidents and improve student behavior on a regular basis. Outside organizations have provide meaningful presentations to students regarding appropriate behavior. A rewards program was introduced to recognize good behavior. Our priority need is to build a school culture that fosters the social emotional growth of students and provide an environment where students and staff feel safe. To improve student behaviors, , we will be providing professional development for staff on behavioral management strategies, offering workshops for parents, implementing Positive Behavior Intervention and Support program (PBIS) and implementing rewards to students for good behavior . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students will show an increase in their ratings in academic and personal behaviors on their Report Cards indicating social and emotional growth. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will be provided workshops and professional development on PBIS strategies Sept. 2018- June 2019 PBIS Team Teachers, paraprofessionals, aides, administration, secretaries Assemblies on school reward system for positive behavior of students, anti-bullying and character development Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Outside vendors, Guidance Counselor, Administrators, teachers Monthly review of incidents in 2018-2019. All Students Workshops for parents of ELLs and SWDs focusing on academic and behavior supports ENLs SWDs Parents of ENLs and SWDs Sept. 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Administrators Sept. 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Special Education teachers, ENL teachers Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration, Guidance Counselor and PBIS Team Implementation of PBIS. All Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held throughout the year on behavior management and child development. Parents will be invited each month for student of the month. Parents will be invited four times a year for awards nights. 2018-19 CEP 18  Guidance Counselor will set up meetings with groups of parents and individual parents Teachers, Administration, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator will help with implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Academic Intervention Services provided during the school day Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 35% of students will show an increase in their ratings in academic and personal behaviors on their Report Cards indicating social and emotional growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Referrals, incidents in OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 123Q has systems in place to accommodate teachers on each grade level working together to plan and deliver instruction for each class. Teacher inquiry groups have been established and are working towards building capacity to follow new protocols for analyzing student work, as well as identifying areas of instructional need. To further strengthen the inquiry process, a deliberate focus has been placed on the progress monitoring component of inquiry. A majority of students are not meeting the standards in reading. Specifically, only 40% of students in grades 3-5 met the standard on the NYS reading exam. A major focus of our grade teams is on improving literacy skills. In order to build student reading and writing, teams analyze assessment results and student work with the use of rubrics and identify trends and areas of need. Strengths: ● Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to revise and refine curriculum based on effectively developed inquiry practices. ● Grade-level and vertical inquiry teams meet bi-monthly and monthly respectively to discuss student progress; identify strengths and areas of improvement, common trends and implications for teacher practice. Teams look at student data and discuss strategies to address the gaps in student learning. Needs: ● Increase students’ reading comprehension by progress monitoring through the use of baseline, mid-year, and end-of-year assessments, checking for understanding (Beginning, Middle, and Ending), tiered task assignments, and students asking/answering probing questions ● To strengthen the inquiry process by identifying students' needs and adjusting the curriculum to support these needs. The priority need is for teacher teams to assess student reading comprehension and fluency and plan strategies to address student gaps in order to improve students' reading skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 20  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional development from the instructional coach for all literacy teachers and teachers working collaboratively in grade teams, 50% of students will improve in reading comprehension and meet proficiency as measured by students moving 3 or more reading levels as compared to the fall 2018 Fountas and Pinnell baseline results. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The schedule for Academic Intervention will be created to facilitate teaching targeted areas of need in reading for students. AIS Teachers will meet with a target group of students in Tier 2 and Tier 3 grades K-5. Identified Tier II and Tier III students, October 2018-June 2019 Provide Students with Disabilities with targeted instruction provided by Special Education teachers who focus on the specific areas of need of each student. Students With Disabilities Sept. 2018-June2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, AIS teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, IEP Teacher, Special Education teachers Facilitate schedule for the ENL teacher to push-in and pull-out to provide reading support in and out of the classroom for English Language Learners. ELL students Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL teacher Principal Assistant Principal Assess students' reading levels at least 3 times during the 2018-19 school year using Fountas and Pinnell benchmark kit. All students in K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teachers in grade teams review the data and plan lessons together to address the deficits and plan lessons. All students in K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers Literacy coach Vertical Inquiry Team Grade-Level Inquiry Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to attend Meet the Teacher night where teachers will discuss the reading program and present strategies to support children at home. In addition, teachers will invite parents on Tuesday to meet with them on an individual basis and parents are welcome to request face to face meetings with teachers. Regularly scheduled parent workshops will be provided on reading strategies and expectations so that 2018-19 CEP 22  parents can build their understanding of Common Core reading standards and can support their children at home. Parents are invited to attend student led conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark kit, Fundations, Max Scholar are used to assess and support students. Teachers will meet in teams on Monday afternoons to address concerns and plan activities to support students. Per session will be used for after school program and AIS services will be provided during the day. Literacy coach will support teachers in adapting the curriculum a needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of students will increase one level on Fountas and Pinnell assessment compared to the September 2018 baseline assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark kit, Fundations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Principal Performance Observation (PPO) by the District Superintendent's office indicated, "Continue to strengthen teacher pedagogy in effectively developing multiple opportunities for learning extension and in the use of questioning and discussion techniques so that all learners are engaged in rigorous tasks and high-level discussion." Another suggestion from the PPO was to, "Work with teachers to incorporate additional strategies for students to self and peer assess against the rubrics so that they can monitor their own understanding and progress." At teacher team meetings as well as during administrators meetings with teachers, there is always mention of major deficits in student writing. We will therefore provide professional development for teachers on incorporating writing in daily lessons. Since many of our students enter our school with limited English and literacy skills, our priority need is to provide professional development for staff on strategies to build students' writing skills and include daily opportunities for writing in all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional development for teachers on the implementation of Teachers College Writing program, 70% of students will meet the writing standards as measured by end of unit school assessments . 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Meeting with teachers at Initial Planning Conferences to set goals for the 2018-2019 school year focused on implementing the writing process.. Professional development will be provided on Monday afternoons. The Professional development team will plan strategies to be shared at weekly teacher professional development Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept. 2018 Principal and Assistant Principals All teachers rated under Advance Sept. 2018- Principal and Assistant Principals Oct. 2019 Professional Development team Oct. 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals, lead teacher, coach Special Education teachers Students will be given opportunities to self edit and peer edit their writing Provide professional learning workshops, demo lessons for teachers in all content areas, mentor new teachers, common planning time for teachers, meetings with administrators. Students Teachers Teachers will work with SWDs in small groups on strategies to raise student engagement and participation in discussions. SWDs, Sept. 2018- ENL teacher will work on building vocabulary skills of ELLs in order to increase their understanding and participation in classroom discussions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ELLs June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be conducted monthly to increase parents' understanding of curricula and strategies to encourage students to participate in the classroom and school activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers College Writing project, per session as needed for Professional development and inter-visitations 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 , as a result of professional development for teachers on the implementation of Teachers College Writing program, 50% of students will improve in writing as measured by mid year school assessments . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College Writing rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the results from the School Learning Environment Survey, 87% of parents said they had been invited to visit classrooms during the school year and 82% of parents indicate they were asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school in classrooms or school-wide events. In addition, 23% of parents indicated that they were not invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction and 45% of parents have also indicated that they would like the school to offer stronger enrichment programs. We feel it is necessary to increase parental involvement and communication. It is necessary to engage parents and families in all aspects of school life, including workshops, performances, activities, programs, and meetings. In an effort to increase the number of parents involved and participating in school activities, surveys are conducted to identify parents specific interests. During the 2017-18 school year, we saw an increase in the number of parents attending student-led conferences.. Since we understand the critical role of parents as partners, our priority need is to increase address parental concerns by increasing the types and number of opportunities for parents to be involved in their children's educational experience. We have found that student-led conferences have been the most effective way of directly connecting parents to the school community as well as building students' self esteem. Therefore, our priority need is to increase the number of parents participating in Student Led Conferences with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of parents will attend at least one student-led conference, Parent Teacher conference and other school-wide events. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a parent survey to gather information on the types of workshops that parents would like to attend, as well as the times that would be most convenient for them. Parents Sept. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, SLT, Parent Coordinator Teachers will use parent outreach time on Tuesday afternoons to provide individual meetings with parents to discuss student needs as well as provide workshops around CCLS, homework help, New York State assessment Parents of students in grades PK-5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers School activities including family events and workshops that address students' needs including SWDs and ELLs SWDs, Sept. 2018 - June 2019 ELLs, Parents Regular communication with parents with school messenger, school internet page Parents of K - 5 students Sept.2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers, students, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Student-led conferences. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Website, e-mail, calendars, school messenger, student-led conferences, school plays, Assistant Principals, SLT, Parent Coordinator. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 28  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of parents will attend at least one student-led conference, Parent Teacher conference and other school-wide events. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from workshops, PTA meetings, parent meetings with teachers, student-led conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Raz Kids 1:1 During school day Fountasand PinnellIntervention Small Group Pull-out Push-in After school Saturday school Differentiated Instruction Essential Skills web basedprogram Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Scores Fountasand Pinnell M-class NYCwriting task Reading teacher Recommendations RTI Performance Tasks Formative assessments Summative Assessments Weekly Quizzes GoMathasessments Mathematics Go Math Tier II 1:1 During school day NYS Math Scores RTI Push-in New York Coach Pull-out After school I Ready Math Small Group Mathleticsweb based program Saturday school Teacher Recommendations Performance Tasks Formative assessments Summative Assessments 2018-19 CEP 30  Weekly Quizzes Science Science Test Scores RTI 1:1 Teacher Recommendations Small group Formative assessments Summative Assessments Weekly Quizzes Teacher Recommendations Formative assessments Summative Assessments RTI 1:1 Graphic organizers Small group Weekly Quizzes Minor behavior forms At-risk counseling 1:1 OORS incident reports Group and individual counseling Small Group Teacher Anecdotals Teacher Recommendations Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During the school day After school Saturday School During the school day After school Saturday School During the school day 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 26 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Purchasing books, book bags, notebooks, uniforms, school supplies. STH population will receive counseling services by the Guidance counselor and Social Worker and academic support during the school day, after school and/or on Saturdays as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4,000 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff recruits highly qualified teachers through Open market or hiring fairs. The secretary will work closely with the HR person to ensure that non-Highly Qualified teachers meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers. New teachers are given opportunities to participate in inter-class visitations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 10 month training on the Danielson rubric and CCLS. Post-observation conferences. Teacher Evaluation ratings with end of year reflections of teachers 10 month training on Go Math and ReadyGen programs Professional Development Committee discuss needs and arranges for differentiated professional learning opportunities for teachers On Monday afternoons, teachers are provided with instructional strategies to address various learners in their classes. This includes Daniel Framework, research based reading, writing, and math strategies On Tuesday, grade teacher teams work together to analyze student work. Teachers collaborate and share best practices during common planning time,;teachers plan lessons to address students' needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 34  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). To ensure that our children have a smooth transition from pre-kindergarten into kindergarten, our pre-kindergarten team provides an environment that meets the social and emotional needs of the children through strong teacher collaboration and parental involvement. Our pre-kindergarten teachers work collaboratively. Each week during inquiry they have an opportunity to develop their units of study, look at student work and create different types of assessments that are used to monitor students’ growth. All lessons taught within the unit of study are aligned with the New York State Pre-kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core. The school provides an orientation meeting for parents of pre-school children entering our elementary program. Information packets and support are provided for new parents that include tips and techniques for parents to use at home to promote literacy and numeracy. Families have opportunities to meet administrators, teachers and support staff before students enter kindergarten. Parent workshops will be held throughout the school year on Common Core Learning Standards, Pre-K Developmental Screening, transitioning, and enhancing parent/child relationship. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers play an integral role and are the prime decision makers as to which classroom assessments will be administered. The Principal along with the coaches schedule school wide assessments. Teacher teams analyze the results of benchmark assessments. Grade teams work together to focus on strategies to address students’ areas of need. Instructional team consists of teachers from all grades; these teachers analyze the needs to ensure that 2018-19 CEP 35 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 369,821 100,565 12,366 0 3,870,971 x x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5c, 5e,6 5a, 5c, 5e 5a, 5c, 5e, 6 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local students are given supports as needed. In addition, bi-monthly cohort meetings are held to vertically and horizontally analyze student data and work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 36   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 123Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 123Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 123Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 40  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 123Q has put in place a plan with various opportunities of language support for ELL and immigrant students throughout the school day. This plan includes morning sessions Monday through Friday except Tuesday from (7:30-8:00a.m). The After school program on Wed & Thurs. for Grades 2-5, 2:30-4:30. The Saturday Academy (8:30-12:00)Grades 3-5. Programs are present to accommodate ELL/Immigrant students language needs in order to be commensurate with their peers in their classroom and emulate with the CCSS rigorous curriculum. Instruction focuses on learning the English language, basic skills (phonics, vocabulary, grammar, forming simple to complex sentences, decoding /endcoding words etc) language skills and strategies, comprehension activities, test preparation and use of these skills in order for students to recapitulate learned skills to their classroom. Language of instruction is English. Types of materials used are: Language Power reading skills and language practice with student workbooks, Fundation sounds and letter practice, sight words, phonic words and sentence forming, and NY Ready ELA/Math. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ALL Professional Development 2:30- 4:30 provided on Monday afternoons, includes various activities and strategies that will positively impact the progress of ELL’s in the classroom as a whole or small group instruction. Examples include Check for understanding activities professional development meetings, I can statement discussions throughout the lessons to promote checking for understanding, Guided reading strategies, classroom management skills , teacher resources for materials to use for instruction to fit all student needs including ELLs and tittle III students. Unpacking and analyzing programs like Universal Literacy, Maxscolar reading programs, Mathletics and Amplified Science etc. ENL teachers will participate in a 10 month professional development plan focus on P.S. 123 Queens Five School wide Initiatives. The Teachers to receive training will include the ENL teachers and teachers of immigrant students. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development They will participate in weekly professional development on Mondays from 2:30 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. in the following areas: Teachers College series PD /TC Writers workshop, Analyzing data, Computer based program training to help ELL's and immigrants on using IOS Apps, Raz Kids, Think Central, Mathletics and Maxscholar. NYSESLAT proficiency level patterns across the grade, Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Citywide Instructional Expectations (CIE), Depth of Knowledge (DOk), Hess Matrix, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Danielson Framework for Teaching Research-Base Teaching Evaluation Rubric, Professional development on working with at risk ELL Students. The training will be provided by the Teachers College, ELL's Bourgh field support point person, Administration, Marie Rousseau, Metz Joshua and the Reading Coach Certified and non-certified teachers will receive ongoing professional development focus on best practice strategies for ENL students. In addition, teachers will provide direct instruction to all ENL students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs and Immigrant (Tittle III) students will participate in various family and informative workshops given throughout the year to support their needs and create family memories in order to have a great school-home connection. Workshops will include: how to help your child at home with their school work, parent tips on how to help their children with reading and math and make it fun, puppet making activities workshops. A series of Parent Engagement meetings for information on going events, programs available to ENL and Immigrant students and their parents. Parents will be notified through parent newsletters in student native language, school website, phone calls ,during parent engagement meetings on Tuesdays, and 3rd Saturday Meeting with the Principal. All meetings will be 45-60 minutes in duration depending on discussion and parent participation. Each workshop focuses on student and parents individual needs after gathering information through a survey. Selected teachers will cover topics related to parents helping their children read, assisting their children with homework , understanding of standards in English and native Language, ENL program description, student goals, resources used to help students learn and explanation of assessments and accommodations used to measure students' progress and achieve success. Agendas for all workshops, orientation meetings and attendance sheets, parental contact, invitation records are kept at the ENL teachers office. Memos and parental letters are translated whenever possible in most languages available to fit parental language translation needs. This is 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities possible through staff cooperation with translating knowledge to assist in a timely fashion. Language and interpretation services office is utilized whenever possible to ensure parents get the assistance needed and be included in their children’s education. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem After and Before School Per Session $10000 Supervisor Pay $3000 Purchased services  High quality staff $1400 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Supplies $2000 Resources. $2000 $100 0 0 18500 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Morning Academic Intervention Program ENL Afterschool Program And Saturday Academy For Parent Engagement and PD for instructional leaders Multiple language student Dictionaries NYSESLAT Practice Books Ipad programs such as brainpop ESL and brainpop Espaniol etc. IOS ENL Apps, Roseta Stone 0 0 Total added 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name PS123Q Borough Queens School Number 123 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony M. Hooks Coach Cynthia Raber ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ellen Konstantinopoulos Teacher/Subject Area Virgina Nunez/ Sp. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Erika Villani Related-Service Provider Colleen McCabe Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal James Bart Coach School Counselor Cinthia Fajardo Parent Sharell Lloyd Parent Coordinator Norma Pau Paw Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Yudelka Ramirez. Speech C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 649 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 n/a 3 n/a 4 n/a 2 n/a K n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 n/a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that are used to assess the early literacy skills at our school include Fountas and Pinnell, weekly quizzes, conferencing notes, progress monitoring, and performance tasks. The data provides insights into the types of instruction students would benefit most from, what needs to be taught and what areas the students have mastered or are approaching. It also explains with precision which students have not mastered a specific skill(s) or concepts and needs additional support. It provides the teacher with insights into each students independent reading level and its relationship to their ELL status as a beginner, intermediate, or advanced student. This information also reveals whether most ELLS are using higher order thinking skills when reading and which students need more help meeting the CCLS. The data helps drive instruction by showing areas of need in the literacy program and helps target the students that require additional intervention. It also demonstrates whether the program in place are working to meet the students' educational success . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 49  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success is measured by the amount of progress made by the students as shown on their test scores (e.g. NYSESLAT, MOSL Tests, and NYS Common Core ELA and Math Exams) as well as progress made in the classroom pertaining to reading and math levels. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In an effort to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework, the classroom teachers monitor the students Tier I level. They provide meaningful lessons, set challenging academic goals and build abilities through dialogue, questioning and sharing. At this level, the teacher uses formative and summative assessments to determine who needs further asssistance. The data is used to monitor students progress and reteach skills when needed. On the Tier II and II level, the ENL teacher, SETTs and AIS teachers provide targeted instruction and additional academic support to help students. At this level the teachers utilize different strategies to assist students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that most ELLs entering are emerging/transitioning across grades K-5. There are a few commanding students in grades 1 and mostly in grades 3 and 4. This means that for some students we need to focus on vocabulary development, reading comprehension and writing. Other students need to spend more time developing listening and speaking skills. On the NYSITELL proficiecy levels have been lower in the upper grades than lower grade students. Students that are profiennt are still being supported. Students' NYSESLAT proficiency level patterns across the grades at P.S 123Q tends to be higher in the upper grades than the lower grades. Most students in grades K-5 tend to be at the emerging or transitiong levels in the listening and speaking modalities. Upper grade students tend to be in the demonstrated a mixed level of proficiency in the reading and writing modalities. Lower grade students tend to be Entering and Emerging leveled students in the reading and writing modalities. Overall, there is a high improvement rate for all students throughout the years which is clearly shown in the RNMR report. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Ongoing weekly assessments and weekly planning for students to meet benchmark achievement throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program is provided via the push in/ pull out model and is the only program available at this time in our school due to parent preference. P.S. 123Q uses the ReadyGen Literacy program and the Common Core standards to provide a coherent approach in student learning. Additional materials used include Go Math, Foss Kits, 2018-19 CEP 50  Language Power and web based programs as mentioned previously. ENL methedologies are practiced (e.g., scaffolding, TPR, partner-reading activities). Content areas are also covered throughout the series (i.e., math, social studies, and science). Instruction is delivered in 45 minute periods (am and pm sessions) or in a 90 minute block. Students are grouped according to grade and same level of proficiency. Depending on group size, proficiency levels are combined. Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging English Language Learners are grouped together with 360 minutes of instruction per week. Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding ELLs are grouped together with 180 minutes of instruction. Proficient/Commanding are grouped together for 90 minutes of instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL instruction is delivered by the ENL teacher to students that are ELLs using ENL methodologies. Whenever possible, staff and student population are organized in a way where ELL students are placed in their grade levels together to create a coherent flow and routine. Using the push in/pull out model the teacher of ELLs arranges the scheduled days and minutes of instruction entitled as per the CR 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are included in the planning of weekly lessons. Teachers of ELLs and the ENL teacher collaborate and plan lessons to fit the needs of their students. Differentiated instruction is provided for students according to their needs. We use a hands on, visual and auditory method in order to include all 4 models of learning (listening, speaking, reading and writing). Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response are additional ENL methodologies used. Students are instructed through scaffolding, chunking strategies, graphic organizers and vocabulary activities. Computer programs such as Imagine Learning English (directions available in several languages), Raz Kids, Think Central, Tenmarks, and Splashmath are essential materials used by the ENL and classroom teacher as part of student daily ESL sessions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Differentiated instruction together with the following intervention materials are used to service students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) students. Using the balanced literacy approach, P.S. 123Q builds a supportive environment for SIFE students. Students have access to all services such as counseling, resource room, speech and language services, occupational therapy, physical therapy. Materials that are available to the students include bilingual books, audio book recordings, and computer programs. A buddy system where a classmate or peer (bilingual if possible) is assigned to help the SIFE student help adjust to the school environment is also encouraged. b. Newcomers are students attending schools in the U.S. for less than 3 years. These students will be using materials such as ReadyGen, which include rigorous reading experience with authentic text. Students engage in practice, build motivation and 2018-19 CEP 51  improve their reading stamina. Language Power is and ENL program that activates phonics, vocabulary, grammar, and all basic skills needed for practicing and learning the English language. Imagine Learning English computer program is also available for students to practice their basic skills and progress as their level of English increases. c. Plan for developing ELLs receiving service 4-6 years is for these students to become proficient in the areas of weakness. Students will be using the Language Power series and ReadyGen program to practice reading and writing skills. Billingual books from the leveled classroom library are available for studetns to take home and practice their comprehension skills including the support of their families. Raz Kids, and Think Central are two computer programs that provide assignments to reinforce practice in ELA and Math skills. d. Plan for long-term ELLs is to focus on practicing skills in areas of weakness to become proficient and pass the NYSESLAT given annually. The Language Power series is available for student practice. NYSESLAT-geared workbooks and materials for students with sample tests are given in order to become proficient. e. Former ELLs after exiting ELL status for up to 2 years are supported for 90 minutes per week with a push-in model in their classrooms as they continue to have testing accomodations (time and a half or double time if SWDs and separate location). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with specia needs are provided with plenty of visuals and dramatized reading material. Total Physical Response methodologies building academic vocabularym amplifying content and concept knowledge are ways to promote access to academic content and accelerate Engish language development. The technology that is used to help these students include Smart Boards, CD players and computers. The EnL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the administrative team to make sure ELL-SWDs get the correct ELL services. The ELL-SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as the mainstream students. However, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the students abilities and on the IEP. Push in/pull out sessions in ENL , Speech and OT are provided by the services providers whenever necessary to accommodate student needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Content areas within the common core standards are included in the planning of weekly lessons. Teachers of ELLs and ENL teacher collaborate and plan lessons to fit the needs of their students. Flexible programming with teacher collaboration allows ELL -SWDs to actively participate in all activities including grouping with their non-disabled peers. SWD work at their own pace and are not excluded from activities. Assesment tools include weekly skills practice, assessments and test taking practice in content areas and are included in both classes and grouping to assess familiar skills and practices students are used to. Differentiated instruction is provided for students to better asses their needs and learning styles. Using ENL methodologies students are instructed through scaffolding, chunking strategies, total physical response approaches, hands on activities, graphic organizers and vocabulary activities. Instructional materials are provided to the students as well as computer programs such as Imagine Learning English (directions available in several languages), and Language Power leveled reading series are essential materials used by the ENL teacher as part of student daily ENL sessions 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The intervention plan for ELLs include AIS (Academic Intervention Services) and RTI (Response to Intervention). There are after school programs available for students in grades 1-5. During these programs students are immersed in small group instruction using various rigorous strategies. Other interventions include instructing students in academic language, writing, differentiating instruction, using graphic organizers and pictures are also used in targeted intervention programs.Programs like RAZ KIDS and Fundations are included as RTI resourses . 2018-19 CEP 52  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the next school year we plan on continuing after school and Saturday Academy enrichment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all programs offered within the school or afterschool activities. Services that are available are resource room, speech and language services, Phonics for grades 1 in the morning, IMAGINE LEARNING,Wilson's Fundation program, ENL after school for grades 1 and 2 and Saturday Academy. P.S. 123Q will have a Saturday Academy program for grades 3, 4, and 5. This program will provide small group instruction using ELL strategies for instruction in ELA and Math. Students will be engaged in authentic writing experiences in order to learn how to write and be writers who naturally and comfortably use the writing process. Supplemental materials, recommended by both State English and ESL Standards will be used. Lessons are designed to enable students to use English to communicate in social settings; to use English to achieve academically in all content areas in the classroom and to use English in socially and culturally appropriate ways. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials for ELLs that are available include Imagine Learning, Raz-Kids, Think Central, Tenmarks, Splash Math are technology based programs available for each student to go online and practice Language Arts and Math skills that are essential for their progress in learning more of the English language. Students can be assigned homework and the teacher can then evaluate their progress. Data is available and utilized for instructional planning. Technology classes are part of the curriculum where students in grades K-5 are supported in a special class once a week as an extra support class. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? To support the student’s native language, materials containing their native language are provided. Through computer programs and bilingual libraries available students have the support they need to be comfortable and have fun learning the English language. Native language glossaries are also avialiable for support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. These support services are based on students needs, assesments and teacher input. Teachers, Administrators and other personnel take into consideration the students age and grade level in deciding whether an ELL student needs additional support services and which ones they need developmentally. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials for ELLs that are available include Imagine Learning, Raz-Kids, Think Central, Tenmarks, Splash Math are technology based programs available for each student to go online and practice Language Arts and Math skills that are essential for their progress in learning more of the English language. Students can be assigned homework and the teacher can then evaluate their progress. Data is available and utilized for instructional planning. Technology classes are part of the curriculum where students in grades K-5 are supported in a special class once a week as an extra support class. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teachers, support staff, Administrators and parent coordinator to express any concerns or needs on Tuesday afternoons or as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives at the Elementary level. 2018-19 CEP 53  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL teachers will participate in a 10 month professional development plan focus on P.S. 123 Queens Five School wide Initiatives. ELL teachers will participate in weekly professional development in the following areas Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) workshops, Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Citywide Instructional Expectations (CIE), Depth of Knowledge (DOk), Hess Matrix, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Danielson Framework for Teaching Research-Base Teaching Evaluation Rubric, and professional development on working with at risk ELL Students. ELL teachers attend and participate in Teacher Team Meetings, Measures of Student Learning and Measure of Teachers Practice professional development workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. AIS services are available to support ELLs transitioning to junior high school. With the support and organization of the guidance counselor, students attend an assembly where advisors from neighboring junior high schools speak to and answer any questions they may have. Students have the chance visit the potential junior high school they will be attending later on in the year. Professional development will be provided on the process of becoming an English Language Learner, NYSESLAT testing, the new CR-Part 154 Second Language Acquisition Theory, Strategies and Methodologies in ESL, programs for ELLs, helping students meet the CCLS, and data for the ELLs. During professional development teachers will share experiences and strategies that were successful in their classrooms. Teacher will brainstorm strategies that will further assist their ELLs. Grade teacher teams are created and meet to analyze student work, analyze findings, discuss ways to help students master skills they are weak in and create activities aligned with the Common Core Standards. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teacher provides scheduled appointment times with the ELL families to discuss individual goals and progress. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Some parents of ELLs are actively involved with school activities. Parents are invited to attend workshops on how to bridge the gap between school and home instruction. For non-English speaking parents, a translator is present. Handouts are also available for these parents in their native language. Teachers have an open door policy for parents who have any concerns and/or questions or are interested in a classroom visitation. Workshops are also conducted in the school and provide strategies to help children with homework. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Hooks, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS123Q School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony M. Hooks Title Principal James Bart Assistant Principal Norma Pau Paw Parent Coordinator Ellen Konstantinopoulos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Loretta Surrency Parent Colleeen Mc Cabe/Speech Teacher/Subject Area Virginia Nunez/Spec. Ed Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Raber Coach Coach Janine DaSilva School Counselor Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yudelka Ramirez Other Speech Erika Villani Other Classr Teacher/ENL Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language 2018-19 CEP 58  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 59  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 60 
