2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q125 School Name: I.S. 125 THOM J. MCCANN WOODSIDE Principal: JUDY MITTLER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: I.S. 125 342400010-125 6-8 46-02 47 ave Woodside, NY 11377 718-937-0320 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 24Q125 17183612451 Fax: Sara E. Ballute-Scianablo sballutescianab@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Judy L. Mittler Tracey Miller Catherine Zapata Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Sara E. Ballute-Scianablo SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Catherine Zapata N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madeline Taub-Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Ave Corona, NY 11368 Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718 672-3117 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5480 Phone Number: N/A Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Judy Mittler Tracey Miller Catherine Zapata Elizabeth Gaviria Sara Ballute-Scianablo LianneCarlucci Nicole Goldman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Administration Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name ArletteChrzanowski Anny Martinez Rosalia Meneses Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  Our mission statement, “We, the school community of I.S. 125, including parents and local community organizations, will create a safe, welcoming and nurturing learning environment for all students including ELL, Special Education and high achieving students. The quality of teaching and learning will be enhanced through the inclusion of cultural arts and technology into the core curricula while addressing the physical, intellectual, emotional and social needs of the school community in order to promote excellence. Self-esteem, respect, understanding and appreciation of diversity will be fostered, thereby creating a community of lifelong learners committed to the improvement of the world,” embodies our philosophy that a student-centered public education is the cornerstone of the path to college and career. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. I.S. 125, located in Woodside/Sunnyside, Queens, is a robust and vibrant learning community that serves a diverse student body hailing from over 70 countries. Our two hundred and fifty English Language Learners receive a supportive, inclusive and differentiated education during the week. These students have the option to attend an ELL Saturday academy to further their language acquisition. We have a comprehensive arts program, which affords all of our students the opportunity to take dance, theatre, chorus, band, orchestra or art three times a week. Our Regents program offers qualifying students the opportunity to enter high school with credit for four Regents exams, Algebra, 11th grade English, 11th grade U.S. History and Government, and Earth Science or Living Environment, as well as the foreign language proficiency exam. We are in our 16th year of partnership with the Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, which serves 300 students each day for three hours, as well as club programs, including: theatre, dance, chorus, yearbook, Builders Club, Sunnyside Community Services, Kiwanis, student government, green team, UN Thursdays, Respect for All club, March Madness and our morning radio show, Boat Works, Girls Who Code, STEM Club, WBLISS. In addition, we have inter-scholastic basketball teams and intramural sports programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. To better serve our ELL and SWD population, Boost and Blitz has been implemented. This intervention is a hands on approach to teaching phonics based instruction designed to target students reading far below grade level. Through ongoing assessment, this program tracks student progress and enables teachers to determine if students are lacking in fluency or decoding. Additionally, the Rewards program supports student literacy development. We are also implementing Newsela, a non- fiction, cross content reading program that differentiates articles based on students lexile levels. This program gives students the opportunity to dive deeper into vocabulary acquisition and use close reading strategies to deconstruct complex text. The principal, ELL assistant principal, and ELL teacher have attended the Harvard/OELL MS literacy institute workshops to learn and implement strategies to move long-term ELL students into the general population. The Writing Revolution method is applied across all content areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. After reviewing data from the 2018-2019 observation cycles, it was evident that teachers need additional strategies to facilitate questioning and discussion techniques in their classrooms. Professional development opportunities were sought out from Queens North and administrators and teachers participated in a series of sessions throughout the year. As a result of the training, the administration had a deeper understanding of what questioning and discussion techniques should encompass. Therefore, with this finer lens, our ratings were more stringent. After reviewing the 2018-2019 baseline assessments, it was evident that students were lacking in basic writing skills. As a result, the school continued to build on last year's data, and expanded the implementation by sending additional pedagogues to be trained in Judith Hochman’s Writing Revolution Program. It is a program that is designed to address basic writing skills. The teachers turn keyed the training to the staff during PD sessions throughout the school year. All content area teachers continue to implement this program, which is periodically assessed by the administration. 2018-19 CEP 10  According to the results on the NY State ELA exam, the percentage of 3s and 4s at I.S. 125 increased from 44.8% in 2017 to 53.2% in 2018. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q125 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1504 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 100 100 4 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 43 41 17 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 73.9% % Reduced Lunch 17.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 54.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.08 1% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 126 126 20 95.5% 1.3% 16.5% 1.9% 38.2% 0.9% 8 20% 5.5 47.4% 66% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the PPO feedback from the Spring of 2018, the school's strengths include its pedagogy. The principal has very strong structures in place to ensure coherent instructional practices that promote higher order thinking across classrooms. The principal communicates the expectations for the staff through collaboratively derived, data-driven goals to improve student achievement. The staff is engaged in professional conversations to move the school toward using effective vocabulary instruction as a vehicle to further customize instruction and increase rigor. (3.4, 3.1) Additionally, the administration differentiates teacher support based on teacher ability, needs, and student performance. Supports focus on building specific teacher skills, attention to the school's instructional focus, and increasing tiered vocabulary support, guided grouping, and teacher use of questioning and discussion. Intervisitations are powerfully used to drive improvement efforts. The school needs to consider how units and other planning documents are reviewed and use checklists and other tools to define expectations for what great units and other planning documents look like. The staff needs to continue to engage in self and peer curriculum review. Students need to be provided with more learning activities that are focused on targeted skills. The school needs to increase differentiation to provide students with more rigorous and engaging tasks, as well as materials that engage them meaningfully. The school needs to improve on incorporating the CCSS for speaking and listening by ensuring that teachers ask students more complex and varied questions that result in greater divergent thinking during discussions. Teachers also must have students use evidence to explain how they derived their answer(s) and increase how often students respond to a peer's thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as per the Danielson Framework for Teaching, there will be a 3 percent increase in domain 3b. As a result, over 85% of the staff will indicate that they are somewhat comfortable or greater incorporating rigorous and differentiated questioning and discussion activities. Additionally, learning activities are matched to instructional outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Post observation conferences will be conducted after all observations and will include self reflection and analysis of questioning and discussion prompts and activities. Intervisitation by those teachers that received an ineffective or developing in those areas will be scheduled by instructional teacher leaders, which will facilitate the classroom observations of highly effective teachers in domains 3b. Teachers will meet with their supervisors to reflect on best practices and steps to implement new learnings. Teachers provide a variety of appropriately challenging resources and prompts that are differentiated to foster discussion among students in the class. Project Based Learning, STEM projects, and student led book clubs will be embedded into core subjects in order to promote student led discussions. Teachers 9/18-6/19 x 3-6 per year. Administration Teachers with less than effective ratings in 3b. 9/18-6/19 x 2-3 per year as applicable. Instructional Teacher Leaders/ Teachers/ Administration Teachers 9/18-6/19 Daily Instructional Teacher Leaders/Core Inquiry Team Teachers and students 9/18-6/19 Administrators and Teachers x 4 cycles per year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, the PTA President and the Core-Inquiry team will provide a workshop to parents around rigorous instruction in each of the core subject areas. The Rigorous Instruction workshops will be held by the end of the first marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A teacher observation schedule will be created, as well as an intervisitation schedule. The school purchased Teachboost to better aggregate observation data. Two Peer Collaborative Teachers, an IEP teacher, mentor teachers will support teachers in creating rigorous, well structured lessons, that include tasks to promote engaging questions 2018-19 CEP 15  and discussion. Teacher schedules include Common Planning time. Teachers who attend outside professional development sessions will have their classes covered. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Observation data will be analyzed and posted in the Principal's office. This information will serve as a benchmark after each instructional quarter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom observations reports will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After reviewing the 2017-2018 School Environment Survey, 92% of students say that they feel safe in their classes. According to the 2017-2018 School Environment Survey , 58% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. Currently, there are four guidance counselors, a social worker, a psychologist, and school based Western Queens counselors to support the social emotional growth of students. By July 2019, four school based staff members will be trained in restorative circles. Currently, the four circle groups of eight students meet one time each week. Western Queens will continue to push into four classes one day per week throughout the school year to promote interpersonal communication and conflict resolution. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the school will maintain the strengths indicated above. The school will see a four percent increase in students who say that their teachers support them when they are upset. This will be reflected in the 2018-2019 School Environment Survey results. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Core inquiry team will host a series of Growth Mindset sessions to the staff to educate them on the implementation of supportive classroom practices. Teachers 10/18, 12/18, Administration and teachers 1/19 The school based Western Queens counselors will continue providing professional development to teachers around identifying signs of depression, suicidal ideation, bullying, and trauma. Two additional restorative circle groups will be created to support students in their social-emotional growth and coping strategies. Teachers 10/18, 2/19 Administration and teacher. Students 9/18-6/19 Administration and teachers x4 each week Students will periodically be surveyed to assess their feelings of safety and security. Results will be reviewed by the administration, deans, and guidance counselors. Students 11/18, 2/19 Administration, deans, and guidance counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Western Queens and the Core Inquiry Team will provide workshops to the parents on how to support students when they are upset. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will allocate per-session funds for the morning core inquiry meetings. Restorative circle teachers will use their professional assignment periods for meetings with students. A PIP mental health contract funds the school based Western Queens site. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A survey will be given to students in November and February to determine the percentage of students who say that their teacher support them when they are upset. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The student surveys will be used to assess the progress of the programs. Teachers will provide written feedback about the effectiveness of each professional development session. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the June 2018 PPO report, it was noted that an area of celebration for the school was the practice of norming rigor so that all students' needs are met. A need of the school is to continue the strong work that has been done with teacher teams so that teams continue to accomplish goals that are directly related to student progress and achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on the results of the 2018-2019 School Environment Survey, 93% of teachers will respond that teachers in the school make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly content inquiry team meetings will be held by grade to identify high leverage skill development and strategies. At the end of each meeting, the 6th, 7th, and 8th grade teachers will have an open dialogue on how to align and implement these strategies. Teachers Department teams will develop a common academic language that will used horizontally and vertically within the department and interdisciplinary, where applicable. Teachers Department teams will continuously examine assessment data and curriculum maps to ensure that students are properly placed and supported. Teachers Administrators will attend department inquiry meetings and monitor online inquiry folders. Teachers Administration. Administration Teachers and Administration Administrators 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The PTA President and the Parent Coordinator will continue to attend the Core Inquiry Team meetings each week in order to collaborate with the teachers and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Team meetings and Monday professional development time has been allocated for inquiry work and collaboration. Class coverages will be provided for teachers who are involved in intervisitations. The Technology Committee will provide professional development on Google Docs so that participants are fluent in the platform on which they will document their inquiry work. Per-session is available to teachers on the Core Inquiry team which meets every Friday morning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 21  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will be involved in inquiry cycles that target high risk students and those with skill deficits. All work will be published on the Google Doc for Schools platform. Assistant Principals will monitor the inquiry folders for their department teams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Docs folders and teacher surveys. Midterm and final exams will measure student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools survey results, 81% of teachers said that at the school, once they start a new program, the administration follows up to make sure it is working, up 11% from the 70% who said it in 2016-2017. According to the 2017-2018 PPO, the Measure of Leadership Practice was rated as Highly Effective. Although there were strides in the percent of teachers who stated that the administration follows up to make sure new programs are working, the administration will strengthen this achievement throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. According to the 2018-2019 School Environment Survey, 84% of teachers will feel that new programs are followed up on to ensure that they are working. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Administration will create bi-monthly learning walks of the classrooms to monitor and assess the implementation of our school initiatives. Teachers and students Assistant Principals will attend grade team meetings each week to ensure that programs are being implemented. Teachers Post observation conferences will include discussion about our initiatives and how teachers implement them in their classrooms. Teachers Teachers will be required to share best practices around the implementation of our initiatives. Teachers Administration Administration Administration Administration 9/18-6/19 x2 per month 9/18-6/19 x 3 each week 9/18-6/19 x3-6 per teacher 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The SLT committee will collaborate to ensure that parents are aware of the school's initiatives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly team meetings are part of the teachers' schedules and will be attended by administration. Administration will create a schedule of learning walks and classroom observations to ensure that initiatives are being implemented. Time will be allocated during professional development sessions for collaborative learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the administration will conduct a survey of the teachers to determine the effectiveness of the initiatives and how they can best be supported. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A Google Doc survey will be given to the teachers in February 2019. The final results of the 2018-2019 School Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 School Survey, 94% of families say that teachers and families think of each other as partners in educating children. In the 2018 School Survey, 45% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 52% of parents/guardians will respond that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents who attend a parent-teacher conferences will be given a list of activities to volunteer for during the school year including the Multicultural Show, the arts festivals, dances, musical, graduation, and trips. Families within the school community. 9/18-6/19 x 1 each month Administration, Teachers and PTA The PTA will create a Remind Application to share information with parents about volunteer opportunities. A PTA volunteer coordinator will keep track of volunteers and create a calendar to organize parent volunteers. The website will be updated each month with volunteer opportunities. A PTA Facebook page will inform parents about school events and volunteer activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Families within the school community Families within the school community. Families within the school community 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 9/18-6/19 x1 each month 9/18-6/19 x1 each month PTA and Administration Administration and PTA PTA, Teachers and Administration. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts, Western Queens, Kiwanis Club. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Time for the website monitor has been allocated each week. The volunteer opportunities letter will be created by the Parent Coordinator and copied in multiple languages by the copy secretary. The Remind application and Facebook pages are free of cost. A white board will be purchased by the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A sign in record for parent volunteers will be maintained. When parents receive volunteer information during the parent-teacher conferences, they will sign off that they received the information. The PTA secretary will create the Remind Application and send out the volunteer opportunities to the parents. The secretary will set sign up goals for the Remind App and notify parents about the number or volunteers who attend each event. The Parent Coordinator will be responsible for updating the PTA volunteer calendar. In February 2019, the Parent Coordinator will distribute a survey to the parents asking parents if they have had ample opportunities to volunteer at I.S. 125. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School survey results will assess the progress as will the Google Doc survey administered in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The Newselaprogram has been purchased for the upcoming school year as an approved scientific research based program to assist all At-Risk students, our self-contained special education students and ESL students in the following areas: accelerate reading comprehension, vocabulary, writing proficiency and performance on State exams. Newselaoffers differentiated instruction through a web-based platform geared towards the different learning needs of individual students. Close reading strategies are incorporated into various lessons. Elements of Grammar are incorporated into writing assignments. The Common Core State Standards are incorporated to help develop the skills in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. The use of the following technology is also incorporated on an as need basis: Laptops, SMART boards, documents cameras, response pads, iPads, Brain Pop, Rewards, Legends for Learning, and Freedomflix. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) I.S. 125 designs each class based upon a student’s academic performance on both summative and formative assessments. Student’s scoring below State proficiency are programmed to receive academic intervention services. Additionally, teacher recommendation and report card grades determine the students' placement. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) This takes place during the school day, within the classroom with the teacher differentiating his/her lessons according to the needs of the students. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) AIS teachers adapt curriculum, make modifications, provide adaptations and provide Universal Design for Learning strategies as needed. Workstations are used to provide small group instruction as well as one to one when necessary. Students are grouped according to their individual needs and tutoring is provided on an individual basis. Great Leaps is used for the students who have difficulty with 2018-19 CEP 29  Mathematics This takes place during the school day, within the classroom with the teacher differentiating his/her lessons according to the needs of the students. fluency. Technology based programs are incorporated into our self-contained, Integrated Co-teaching and ESL classes. AIS teachers adapt curriculum, make modifications, provide adaptations and provide Universal Design for Learning strategies as needed. Workstations are used to provide small group instruction as well as one to one when necessary. Students are grouped according to their individual needs and tutoring is provided on an individual basis. Technology based programs are incorporated into all classes and the programs I ready and IXL have been implemented. I.S. 125 designs each class based upon a student’s academic performance on both summative and formative assessments. Student’s scoring below State proficiency are programmed to receive academic intervention services. Additionally, teacher recommendation and report card grades determine the students' placement. With the inclusion of Algebra for All, the AIS period for mathematics will be converted to 8th grade mathematics. The current 8th grade mathematics period will be converted to Algebra I. The modules designed by the State of New York as being implemented, Prentice Hall Mathematics book, The following websites are being implemented: www.classzone.com www.ixl/signin/woodside www.khanacademy.org www.mathplayground.com www.funbrain.com www.coolmath.com www.kenken.com http://www.figurethis.org/challenge.toc.htm www.multiplication.com/interactive_games.htm www.kidsnumbers.com www.fun4thebrain.com www.amathsdictionaryforkids.com www.mathisfun.com 2018-19 CEP 30 www.i-ready.com The teachers are incorporating non-fiction leveled texts focusing on real world experiences. Differentiated tasks, Close reading strategies and culminating activities are designed through various assignments including writing to help students meet the particular challenges of reading, writing, speaking, listening, and language in Science. The use of the following technology is also incorporated on an as need basis: Laptops, SMART boards, documents cameras, response pads, iPads, Brain Pop, Discovery Education, Eduware, and School Messenger. Science I.S. 125 designs each class based upon a student’s academic performance on both summative and formative assessments. Student’s scoring below State proficiency are programmed to receive academic intervention services. Additionally, teacher recommendation and report card grades determine the students' placement. Social Studies I.S. 125 designs each class based upon a student’s academic performance on both summative and formative assessments. Student’s scoring below State proficiency are programmed The teachers are incorporating non-fiction articles focusing on career readiness skills. Differentiated tasks, Close reading strategies and culminating activities are designed through various assignments including writing. The use of the following technology is also incorporated on an as need basis: Laptops, SMART boards, documents cameras, response pads, iPads, Brain Pop, Discovery Education, Freedomflix, and Newsela. The NYC DOE Passport to Social Studies materials are used in all social studies classes. This program focuses on all aspects of the math Common Core State Standards per grade. AIS teachers adapt curriculum, make modifications, provide adaptations and provide Universal Design for Learning strategies as needed. Workstations are used to provide small group instruction as well as one to one when necessary. Students are grouped according to their individual needs and tutoring is provided on an individual basis. AIS teachers adapt curriculum, make modifications, provide adaptations and provide Universal Design for Learning strategies as This takes place during the school day, within the classroom with the teacher differentiating his/her lessons according to the needs of the students. This takes place during the school day, within the classroom with the teacher differentiating his/her lessons according to 2018-19 CEP 31 the needs of the students. Counseling takes place during the school day. needed. Workstations are used to provide small group instruction as well as one to one when necessary. Students are grouped according to their individual needs and tutoring is provided on an individual basis. Small group counseling and One on one counseling services are provided to receive academic intervention services. Additionally, teacher recommendation and report card grades determine the students' placement. Teacher referrals, incidents, parental concerns, classroom performance and an open door policy to students will determine if a student is considered a candidate for at-risk services. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Each guidance counselor/social worker, addresses individual student’s specific needs. The following are student support services that are being addressed: counseling, anger management, attendance improvement services, community program links, self-esteem group sessions, parent/family support, mental health related services, health related issues, and transition planning. Studentleaders are used to help improve self-esteem. The School Psychologist addresses individual student’s specific needs. The following are student support services that are being addressed: counseling, anger management, self-esteem group sessions, parent/family support, mental health related services, health related issues, speech/language referrals, occupational therapy referrals, and transition planning.Two teachers will be trained in Restorative Circles during the summer of 2018, and four circle groups will meet twice per week throughout the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, there are 136 students with STH status. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Money is set aside to provide these students with bookbags and school supplies. Occasionally, food is provided to the families. Graduation and student activity fees are waived. The school pays for necessities, including glasses. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The following are the strategies and activities used for recruitment, retention, assignments and support including High Quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  All teachers are given professional development (PD) weekly, as well as on professional development days dedicated to staff development.  Positions are posted on the online Department of Education web site where candidates can apply.  An experienced and well-developed teacher mentors all new teachers.  Highly Qualified Teachers professional development and mentoring are provided by: ELA Supervisor Math Supervisor ELL Supervisor Science Supervisor I.E.P teacher Special Education Supervisor Queens North Teacher Leaders · Struggling teachers meet weekly for guidance and support with subject specific assistant principal. 2018-19 CEP 35  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is planned collaboratively with lead teachers based on school wide surveys to identify teacher’s needs, our Instructional Focus and the Instructional Shifts.  All teachers are given professional development (PD) on a weekly basis, as well as on professional development days dedicated to staff development.  Teachers attend programmed teacher team meetings each week  ELL, ICT teachers attend ongoing professional development.  The literacy and mathematics coaches will support teachers and the Core Inquiry Team will monitor the progress of our Professional Development plan. Teachers are provided with relevant, outside professional development opportunities throughout the city. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 36  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have increased the amount of participation in the decision making process by creating Professional Learning Communities. Based on their assessment of student progress, teachers researched and attended outside PD. Upon returning to the school they turnkey these new strategies to the faculty. We then encourage intervisitations to view these best practices. Teachers continue to support their colleagues with additional small group PD. Through formative and summative assessments, the school community highlights the areas of strengths and weaknesses, which are studied and broken down by content area and subgroups. Strategies and interventions are designed to address the needs of those groups. Team meetings are programmed into each teacher’s schedule providing each teacher with the opportunity to share results from assessments and discuss interdisciplinary learning. The Core Inquiry Team is comprised of representatives from each discipline including ESL and SPED to review data and determine best practices to support our school-wide instructional focus. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5C,5D N/S 5B 5B 5A, 5B 5C Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 744125 NA 7516 11136 9067712 x N/A x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 37  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 38   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 125Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students I.S. 125Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology, computer workshop, English classes for Speakers of Other Languages, parenting skills workshops, parent library, parent coordinator outreach, providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Annual Parent Survey School Leadership Team Development of the Comprehensive Education Plan Active Participation in the Parent and Teacher Association High School Articulation Parent Coordinator Outreach 2018-19 CEP 40  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; Pupil Path training (Skedula) Student Quarterly Progress Reports Parent Teacher Conferences Periodic Assessments Team Meetings Skedula Grade System ● providing assistance to parents in understanding city, state and federal standards and assessments. Academic & Performance Standards Discussions (Common Core Curriculum) Promotional Requirements &Testing Workshops Articulation & Curriculum Meetings Parent Coordinator Outreach ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; Monthly Newsletters Meetings and Workshops (Interpreters Provided) The I.S. 125 Website (Translations by Google) Email School Letters & Notices (Translations by DOE & Staff) Bulletin Board Postings Student Agendas (Translations by DOE) Parent Handbooks (Translations by DOE) School Messenger (Translation by school staff) Parent Coordinator Outreach Maintenance of school website 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parent Trips PTA Meetings School Leadership Team Multi-Cultural Festival Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Hosting educational and family events throughout the school year: Family Trips Workshops Classes Unified Arts Shows Multicultural Festival Book Fairs Community Service Events & Opportunities Annual Curriculum Conference -Conducting parent workshops and classes based on parent assessment needs: Computer Skills English As a New Language English Literacy & Civics 2018-19 CEP 43  Citizenship Preparation Parenting Skills Educational Accountability Common Core Curriculum Assessments Community Resources/Referrals Subsides and Entitlements Housing Information Health & Well Being Bullying Awareness & Prevention Skedula/Pupilpath Translating all school documents and providing interpretation during meetings and events as needed: Use of Department of Education’s Office of Translation & Interpretation Staff Interpreters Volunteer Student Interpreters host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Choice of Consultative Structure Title I Funded School Programs Title I Parent Involvement Funds Parent Involvement Policy School-Parent Compact -Improving home/school communication through the use of: Parent and Student Planners Skedula Grades System 2018-19 CEP 44  Quarterly Student Progress Reports Semi-Annual Parent Teacher Conferences Extended Parent Teacher Conversations School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 125Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this compact is related. ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. 2018-19 CEP 45  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this compact. ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance, assessment results, and other pertinent information for their child. ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. * Providing parents will a list of volunteer activities throughout the school year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs I.S. 125 will continue their support of home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● providing opportunities for parent consultation with staff at Parent Teacher Conferences, during Curriculum Night in September, through extended parent-teacher conversations, and throughout the year at the mutual convenience of parents and teachers during pre-arranged telephone conferences or in person meetings and/or team meetings during the Tuesday parent engagement sessions ● offering opportunities for parents to volunteer in the school as members of the School Leadership Team, with the PTA, as chaperones for trips and special events, as translators during meetings and Parent Teacher Conferences, and as volunteers for special events ● providing parents with timely information about individual student assessments, performance profiles, and other pertinent information ● offering informational and instructional workshops and classes to better prepare parents to support their children’s academic, emotional, and social needs ● forming alliances with parents/guardians in the governance of the school ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at flexible times and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in their children’s education ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this School-Parent Compact and ensuring that these documents are distributed and discussed with parents each year I.S. 125 will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their children’s teachers or other school staff members 2018-19 CEP 47  ● planning activities for parents to meet with teachers during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Conferences, Team Meetings, Extended Parent Teacher Conversations II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 48  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn ● 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 160 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 9 3 6 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S. 125 will implement a Saturday Academy that will target our ELL subgroup population in grades 6-8. The program consists of 9 teachers: 3 certified in ENL, 3 certified in ELA, and 3 certified in Math. This program is an academically rigorous program that is directly aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The program will run from December 3, 2018 through March 25, 2019 for approximately twelve Saturday sessions from 8:30 am to 11:30 am. There will be two classes per grade on the 6th, 7th and 8th grade levels. The program will target approximately 160 ELL's across the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. The number of students will be determined by enrollment for the 2018-2019 school year. This program will build on the strength of the curriculum in both Math and ELA, while building language development in a small group setting of approximately 26 students per class. Each student will rotate between two classes per session. One of the classes will be focused on ELA and instruction will be delivered with the ENL teacher using a co-teaching model. The design of these lessons will be based on the quantitative analysis of the NYSESLAT modalities. Since writing is the school wide goal at IS 125, these lessons will also target effective writing skills throughout the content areas. Various ENL strategies will be used to successfully execute each lesson and the teachers will work in differentiated groups during the work period. Each part of the day will be an hour and a half. The second class will have a main focus on math. The ELA/Math content teacher and the ENL certified teacher will co-plan once a month on the first Tuesday of each month between 3:00 and 3:30 to determine necessary reinforcement of deficient skills. The second class will be designed to focus on the deficiencies of our ELLs in their math classes. Through the quantitative analysis of teacher generated formal and informal assessments and the Math State exam, the lessons will be designed to focus on the deficiencies of our ELL sub-group in their math classes. The classes will be instructed in the English language with attention paid to ensuring that our ELLs meet the standards necessary to pass the required NYS Exams in Math and ELA. There will be six certified content teachers ( 3 ELA and 3 Math) and 3 ENL certified teachers working the Saturday Academy. There will be one supervisor (administrator) on site every Saturday to maintain a safe environment and ensure quality instruction. The supervisor will be there half an hour before and after dismissal to ensure safe drop off and pickup of students by parents. The supervisor will also be responsible for maintaining daily attendance records and program notification letters in English and in the parents' preferred language. All class work, tests and projects, in both ELA and Math will be maintained by the content specialist in a portfolio. Title III Supplementary Material funds will be used to purchase various books and hands on materials to support the instruction of Math and ELA during the Saturday Academy. The main supplemental materials for the Saturday Academy for ELA will be Finish Line for ELLs: English Proficiency Practice: Continental Press and for 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Math Finish Line, NY Math 3rd. edition: Continental Press. Additionally, Bilingual Glossaries will be used as a reference to support home language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers are afforded opportunities for professional development. The rationale for professional development attended by teachers is to engage teachers in new strategies that focus on their students needs. Teachers learn and problem solve in order to ensure that all students achieve success. Many have been trained in Q-TEL, close reading and academic vocabulary. They continue to receive on-going PD opportunities and attend workshops offered by the Executive Leadership Institute, the Office of English Language Learners and the NYC Department of Education in conjunction with Queens North Borough Field Support Center and in house during PD Mondays. Most recently staff have participated in the following workshops and PDs and will continue throughout the 2018-2019 school year: Integrating PBL in the ENL Classroom Teaching Writing to ENL Students Socratic Seminar The focus of these bimonthly PDs will be on building academic vocabulary throughout the content area, as well as teaching writing strategies through the Writing Revolution program that will directly impact student success in writing in the various writing pieces required of students. Furthermore, differentiated strategies for the ELLs in the ELA and Math content areas will be a main focus of ongoing PDs in order to allow ELLs greater access to their academic content areas. These opportunities will directly impact ELLs to develop higher order thinking skills, communications skills, reading and writing skills that they will need to be College and Career ready. All teachers in the program will be required to attend these professional developments. All records, including attendance and agendas, will be maintained by the supervisor of the Saturday Academy. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: English classes, computer workshops, parenting skills workshops, high school information sessions, academic expectations and requirements, and testing awareness presentations are all offered throughout the year to parents. These activities are available to parents, but most are 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities specifically designed to target parents of ELL students. Flyers, invitation letters and telephone blasts are sent home to target parents of Title III participants. Through English and Computer classes, parents are provided with the opportunity to improve their English language skills which will enable them to be better prepared to help their children. They will learn how to navigate the school website and the Skedula on line grading system, which will keep them informed with up-to-date information about their children and the school. English classes will be offered at the beginning of November through June every Wednesday between 10-11 a.m. There will be approximately 25 sessions. Topics to be covered include grammar, conversation, listening, reading, writing and comprehension skills. We will also offer classes for parents on how we are increasing rigor in the classroom. These classes are provided by the parent coordinator. Computer Classes will be offered beginning in November in four-week sessions. The winter session will run from November to January every Tuesday between 3:00 - 3:35p.m. and the spring session will run from February to June every Tuesday between 3:00 - 3:35 p.m. Topics will include navigating the Internet, using Microsoft Office Suite, setting up an e-mail and accessing Skedula and the school website. These classes are provided by the technology specialist. Parenting skills workshops assist parents in their struggle to deal with the challenges of adolescence, life in a new country, navigating a new school system, as well as providing parents with support in their mission to raise responsible and academically successful children. High school, testing, and academic information sessions and workshops provide parents with the knowledge necessary to prepare their children academically, to understand their options in the school system, to learn how to assist their children in making the best choices, and to support them in becoming the best that they can be. Parent Workshops will be held once a month on the first Friday of every month beginning in November and continuing through June between 10-11 a.m. There will be approximately 8 sessions. The workshops will be provided by the parent coordinator in conjunction with the guidance counselors and Assistant Principals where necessary. Guidance counselors assist during high school information sessions and the Assistant Principals assist during the testing and academic information sessions. All records of offerings and attendance for the parent English classes, Computer classes and workshops are maintained by the parent coordinator in a binder in the main office. All parents are afforded translation and interpretation services through teachers at our school who speak the language (Chinese, Bengali, Arabic, Spanish, Urdu, Russian, Greek, Italian, Filipino, Polish and French.) and/or through the translation and interpretation unit of the NYCDOE. All written communication is translated into the home language of the families as identified on the home language survey. 2018-19 CEP 53 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Thomas J. McCann Woodside Intermediate Borough Queens School Number 125 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Judy Lynn Mittler Coach Kristie LaTorre ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Georgia Athanasopoulos Teacher/Subject Area Thomas Liverani Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Paola Sciove Superintendent Assistant Principal Andrea Gnecco Coach Nina Romanitch School Counselor Celia Hanney Parent Astrid Moncayo Parent Coordinator Ken Ruiz Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1511 2018-19 CEP 55 Total number of ELLs 255 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.88%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the Pearson Reading Level Indicator to determine early literacy skills of our ELL population. Teachers look at fluency and comprehension as well as how students scored in each of the four modalities to create lesson plans. Furthermore, after the assessment is administered, teachers are more aware of what independent reading level the class is on, as well as what guided reading/shared reading the students should be working at. Throughout the year students work on Raz-Kids and Newsela and take assessments based on their reading level. The results from these assessments guide instructional planning. The data provides a baseline allowing the teachers to know if the students have made progress or have not. If they made progress, a mew level will be assigned. If they did not make progress, they will work in small groups on guided instruction/guided reading. These assessments measure students ability to comprehend various texts of different genres, Students will periodically be tested to ensure there is growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 56  ENL teachers meet at the beginning of each year to aggregate the data from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, State ELA and Math exams and school demographic data generated through ATS to identify trends which guide the creation of an action plan, grouping, differentiation and guide instructional planning. Time is set aside during Team meetings to support teacher collaboration. The teachers use the data to create small instructional/guided groups. Groups are created based on most current data. Students are assessed in reading and writing skills. Some of the groups will work ion shared writing while others will work on guided reading. Blitz and Boost is used to help students with decoding. Assessments are given weekly, once the students have mastered decoding they can move on to Raz Kids where their comprehension is then assessed. They have the option to either read aloud or listen tp the stories on the computer. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Pearson Reading Level indicator and the pre-assessment on Razz-kids is used as a baseline assessment to identify students' levels, progress and areas of need. ENL teachers measure students growth throughout the year via teacher generated pre and post assessments. Since Raz Kids measure comprehension we use close reading strategies to help students make meaning of text. Some of the skills and strategies we focus on from close reading are, signposts, highlighting the text, and tough questions. Students also use protocols from Expeditionary Learning such as,Final Word. Carousel Brainstorm and Exit Tickets so the teacher can verbally assess students comprehension of the text. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers meet by teams with the content area teachers during their team inquiry meeting once a week. Teachers discuss areas of strength and weakness in language and content in order to formulate an action plan to address interventions. Since our ESL staff travels with the same class and pushes into all the content areas they are able to attend the team meeting and create action plans with the teachers. One of the deficiencies we notices was students were having difficulty with academic vocabulary. We had the teacher use Isabel Beck's Words Their Way to teach content vocabulary. Students were taught how to tier words. They were given the words with picture and came up with student friendly definitions. As a class they came up with definitions for each word. Throughput the week the students used TPR to interact with each fo the words. This protocol provided consistency because it was used with the students in each content class. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Through analyzing the data of our ELL students, we have and will be implementing the following RTI's: -Instruction will be differentiated for all students, grades 6-8. ESL students receive an additional 5 periods a week of AIS which os provided by a certified ESL teacher. We use data from the NYSESLAT. The focus of AIS is to make the students proficient readers and writers, therefore that is the focus for AIS. -The Blitz and Boost Program will be used to help students receive support in phonics, fluency and decoding. This is used for ESL students who have difficulty decoding and speak little to no English. -Newsela, Raz-Kids, iReady will be used to help students progress and move up in reading levels. -Close Readings, Thinking Maps and the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit is used to build academic language and vocabulary. -Juicy Sentences, IXL and Writing Revolution are used to help students understand grammatical nuances, forms and functions -Socratic Seminars and Book Clubs are used to assess all four modalities. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs include the NYSESLAT, and NYS ELA and Math exams. Initially, based on the NYSESLAT scores, entering and emerging students are placed together and transitioning and expanding students are placed together. Once assessments are administered by the ESL teachers, sometimes students are switched if the teacher feels they would benefit from being in a different level class. Students are given an additional 5 periods of week of AIS. One ESL teacher travels with the same class everyday. The teacher is given common planning time to meet and plan lessons with the content teachers. 2018-19 CEP 57  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? A spreadsheet with individual student assessment data is created for our ENL population. The ENL teachers filter the information based on their student population. The ENL department then looks over the data and makes recommendations for adjustments in programs. This takes place at the beginning of each school year. Throughout the year data such as informal classroom assessments are conducted. Students are assessed on the four modalities. Groups are created based on this data and students switch groups based on their levels. Students recieve 5 periods of AIS, reading and writing skills are reinforced by the ENL teacher. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We use the integrated ENL co teaching model of instruction for all of our ENL classes in grades 6-8. Proficiency levels are grouped as follows: entering (Homogeneous group), emerging/transitioning (heterogeneous group) expanding (homogeneous group), and the students are placed in on each grade level (6-8) classes with a push in co-teacher. For the entering and emerging/transitioning classes in the 6th, 7th and 8th grades, there is one licensed ESL teacher, who follows the classes at all times. All subjects are co-taught with the content certified teacher. For the expanding ENL classes, one certified ENL teacher will be assigned to two classes, where the co-teaching model will be in place with a content certified teacher, throughout the instructional day. Furthermore, each class is given a 45 minute standalone ENL unit of study, where the ENL teacher will be able to support their language acquisition. Commanding students are placed in grade appropriate general education classes where a licensed ENL pedagogue co-teaches and provides the .5 integrated ENL unit of study. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In September, our ENL staff meets to review and analyze the results of the NYSESLAT. This is done to determine proficiency levels, the required number of hours of service, as well as to analyze trends in strengths and weaknesses in the different modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. The data from the NYSESLAT, as well as other assessments, i.e., ELA and Math State Exams, help both the ENL teacher as well as the classroom teacher in grouping their students and providing the best language acquisition plan based on ENL strategies of differentiated instruction. All our ENL teachers are provided, by the administration, a detailed schedule, clearly indicating the expectations. As per CR Part 154 (Chart 5.1), our ENL students, entering, emerging, and transitioning receive two units of study per week, totaling to 360 minutes (broken down accordingly to the ENL Integrated and Stand Alone instruction). Our expanding ENLs receive one unit of study per week, totaling 180 minutes per week. Our commanding students receive .5 or 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. ICT and Special Education LEPs are serviced according to their proficiency levels which dictates the number of instructional hours. Students are grouped by ability, then placed within a teachers program which is reflected in 2018-19 CEP 58  STARS so that the students receive proper servicing. Students receive additional servicing in all content areas (Social Studies, Math and Science) in addition to the service they receive in ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We offer the freestanding ENL program. Steps for differentiation are put in place to ensure that students receive the rigor and high standards set forth by the CCLS. ELL teachers provide the necessary steps for modification and differentiation to ensure that language expectations are met. Content area instruction is delivered through differentiated instruction using ENL strategies of scaffolding through visual aids, charts, thinking maps, cooperative learning as well as partner work with native language support. Glossaries, dictionaries, and pictures are available to facilitate the acquisition of academic language in the content area. Students are given Ipads to use Google translate and/or view images of new material. Teachers use the strategy of juicy sentences to introduce new material. This strategy allows the students to break down the text and identify the main idea of key concepts and material. Once this strategy is completed, teachers use several close reading strategies from Notice and Note to breakdown the text. Students use this to make meaning of text and to identify places where they can comment or ask questions. Close reading is done throughout the units in all content area sunjects so there is consistency across all classes. Teachers in all areas use strategies from Kylene Beers to teach vocabulary and build language acquisition. Students are given the opportunity to use TPR and interact with new words at least 5 times per week. Often as a culminating activity students will engage in a Socratic Seminar where they will be required to use new vocabulary and their packets which they close read during the seminar. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are initially evaluated during the informal interview in their native language, as well as by in-house personnel. Spanish students are given the Spanish LAB-R during the first ten days after registration. All pedagogues are made aware of the students' home language by the data sheet provided by the Assistant Principal, Mr. Gnecco, at the beginning of the year and ongoing as students enter the building. Teachers are provided biographical data on every student in the building including preferred language. Just as with communication to parents the preferred language is honored to students by providing accommodations such as translation dictionaries and glossaries, technological translation programs (Newsela), and State Math and Science exams are provided in students preferred language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) SIFE: Our SIFE students have been identified and placed in the appropriate level ENL class. These students are strongly encouraged to attend the Title III program in addition to any other literacy and or math supports. During this time they are serviced by an ENL teacher. They receive a period of stand alone ENL unit of study each day where the focus is on the 4 modalities of reading (skills and comprehension strategies), writing (craft and process, basic spelling, vocabulary and grammar), speaking , and listening. b-d) Due to the new Common Core Learning Standards, all students are required to take the same assessments at the end of the year. Therefore, our newcomer students, developing and long term ELLs are immersed into a class which provides rigor according to the standards. The ENL teacher follows and co-teaches with each ENL class and provides differentiated instruction through the use of visual images, thinking maps, foldables, use of highlighters, workstations, technology, vocabulary building using games and mapping, shades of meaning vocabulary cards, and a variety of scaffolds to meet the needs of each individual student. Testing accommodations for ELLs: time and three quarters on all test (teacher generated and state exams) e) Former ELL: Transitional classes are provided to former ELLs where they are still receiving .5 units of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA/content area and/or other approved services. After scores and data are analyzed, many of the former ELLs are given the opportunity to participate in foreign language classes as well as the choice to sit for history, science and ELA Regents exams. Former ELLs receive ELL test accommodations (time and three quarters) for two years after testing 2018-19 CEP 59  commanding. Students who demonstrate limited English proficiency will use a phonics based program called Blitz and Boost. This program allows the students to be assessed periodically. In addition to this program they will also use Raz Kids. This is a program which assigns levels of books to students. Again, an assessment is provided so the teacher knows if the students have progressed. Strategies such as choral reading, shared writing, Juicy Sentences, QTEL, Socratic Seminar Close Reading are used for all levels of students, they are modified to meet the needs of the students. All ESL students are invited to attend the Title III program on Saturdays. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Juicy sentences, close readings and QTEL are the instructional strategies that are used with the ELL-SWD population. These instructional strategies ensure that this specific sub group receives all the content area knowledge necessary, along with the language development. Additionally, Writing Revolution, Blitz and Boost, Expeditionary Learning, and close reading strategies are implemented in the classroom. Students are also supplied with language translation dictionaries. In addition thinking maps, visuals, workstations, and the use of i-Pads and chrome books add great support for these students. To stay in compliance with the CCLS, focusing on academic rigor, on grade level materials are used for these students and the teachers are required to differentiate any tasks according to the students' IEP goals. All students will study a variety of short stories to be able ti identify plot elements. Non fiction unit from Expeditionary Learning and read a variety of novels. In addition, students will be able to use strategies from Writing revolution to create full essays. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Grades 6-8 have at least 1 ICT, 1 SETTS and 1 Self Contained class. Many of our ELL-SWDs are placed in these classes due to the extra curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility that are available to meet the diverse needs according to the students' IEP. A language support class (ENL) is mandated to these students for extra reinforcement. Furthermore, these students are strongly encouraged to attend Morning tutoring and are given first priority to get a seat in our Title III program. As well as the two interventions mentioned above our students are also serviced in small group and/or individualized instruction given within each specific content area on an as needs basis by the special education and/or ENL provider. ENL students are not given a FL, instead they are given an additional 5 periods of AIS where they can build upon their reading and writing skills. Each year we look at the data and choose students who can take the Algebra 1 Regent Exam. Students must demonstrate proficiency in math and score at least a 3 on the state math exam. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All pedagogues (ENL teachers and content area teachers) accommodate the specific needs of each child as per their learning style ELL proficiency level and reading level. To make this successful we have i-pads and chrome books for all the ELL students. With the technology, students can dictate, draw, highlight, view visuals etc. to meet the needs of their specific learning style. Subsequently, differentiated tasks and rubrics in all content areas are given to students on an as needs basis for their writing pieces. During content classes manipulatives and thinking maps are used. Furthermore, each ENL class receives one period a day of language support (stand alone ENL study).This ENL class is designed to reinforce content area skills across the 4 modalities. Additionally, a Saturday Academy has been set up where the majority of the ELL students attend. This is also a reinforcement of the content area skills across the 4 modalities. Additional intervention programs, that target our ELLs, and that are provided to our ELLs in each of the content areas include: ELA--Blitz and Boosts, i-Ready, IXL, close reading, Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Juicy Sentences; Math--i-Ready Math and IXL; SS- Discovery Education; Science--Eduware, Study Island. All content area classes apply Writing Revolution, Google translate, Brain-Pop--which also has translation of material in Spanish, Newsela--which also has translation of material in Spanish and accountable talk stems translated in the students' home languages. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 60  Writing Revolution program is being implemented to support grammar and sentence structure. ENL teachers will educate students on the strategies of Writing Revolution. These strategies will be reinforced within each content area subject throughout the lesson. Students will also continue to use Thinking Maps to organize their ideas and to use the information during a Socratic Seminar. We will continue to have students build fluency by having them practice using th language through Socratic seminars, choral reading and class presentations. This year we will be adding Newsela to supplement non-fiction reading. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All curricular and extracurricular activities in the school building are extended to the ELL population, with the exception of a foreign language. To supplement the foreign language, all ELL students are scheduled to take an ENL class where all modalities are reinforced. This class has shown great improvements in our ELL populations' progress. We decided to take foreign language out of their schedule because these students are learning English as a New language. ELL students who have tested expanding and or commanding are offered the choice of foreign language. ENL students are invited to attend the Saturday Program which runs from November through May. The program reinforces English and Math skills as well as prepares students for all modalities of the NYSESLAT. Additionally, Champions Club is an after school tutoring/athletic program that most of our ELL population attend. All of these programs are extended to these students through forms which are also translated in the students' home languages. Students are also offered Morning Tutoring Mon - Thurs from Nov. - June. These programs rarely ever close, and exceptions are always made if they are. The funding for the Saturday academy is through Title III. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers of ENL classes use Smart Boards, Promethean Boards and Response Pads to allow students to interact with the lesson. Furthermore, all ELL students in the building have been supplied with their own I-pad, which is kept in the classroom and used throughout the content area and they have access to chrome books. Different applications are used for the different learning styles amongst the students. The native language materials, we have found, are better accessible using technology, as opposed to keeping them in the library. While the libraries are still equipped with native language texts, the I-pads are also equipped with applications for native language content use. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All students in ENL classes are taught in English with differentiated leveled materials (Leveled Texts). Although these materials are on grade level, manipulatives, thinking maps and other teacher created materials are used to support our ELLs. Furthermore, the classroom libraries have many various home language texts which support all the materials being taught in the content. Students also have bilingual translation dictionaries and content specific glossaries in their home language which they use from day one. Students are given access to over 100 E-books, Raz Kids, Google Translate. The libraries are stocked with high interest low readability books made up of 60 percent fiction and 40 percent non fiction. Students also haver access to Duo Lingo, a language learning program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Newsela is a web-based differentiated reading program that is being used to supplement reading/writing leveled books. Lessons are tailored to match each student's reading level. Students are able to read the same article and participate in classroom discussions. The program is offered in English with Spanish supports. The support provided through this program corresponds to ELLs age, grade level, and learning ability (SIFE, long-term ELLs) by building skills in reading comprehension, vocabulary and writing. Newsela is a data base of current event stories tailor-made for classroom use. Articles are indexed by themes that are student friendly and can be accessed in different formats and levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Summer school is offered to newly enrolled students and non mandated ELL students to prepare them for the upcoming school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are offered the option to learn a foreign language on a case by case basis. ELLs are actively learning English as a New Language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development takes place every Monday, from 2:20-3:40, Election Day and Brooklyn Queens Day. Specific PD's on the various technological advances such as I-pads, chrome books, Newsela, Raz-Kids, IXL, I-ready, Skedula Grades, close reading, annotating text, Writing Revolution, Book Clubs and Socratic Seminars are given during this time as well as during the school day on an as needs basis. In addition PD sessions combine the Assistant Principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, speech therapists, parent coordinators, secretaries, classroom teachers and ENL faculty so that all staff are aware of current trends and expectations. Teachers are being immersed into the CCLS and they are being guided on how to make their instruction academically rigorous, while still differentiating for our ELL population. The instructional focus of the school is to implement close readings into all classes, including content. This focus is supported during the year through various PD's. Subsequently, the use of more effective vocabulary within this writing is also being highly measured. Therefore, ongoing professional development opportunities, focusing on the above, occur within our building. Professional development training consists of: building tier II vocabulary within non-fiction texts (juicy sentence), writing process, juicy sentences (to master the different forms of sentences), creating effective tasks and rubrics (to challenge our students), promoting instructional conversation while reading and writing (questioning) Socratic Seminars, Writing Revolution, Book Clubs, making the co-teaching model work effectively, and the analysis of student work to effectively meet the needs of the students. The pupil accounting secretary, parent coordinator, and bilingual coordinator attends PD through DELLS to keep updated with changes. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Creating expository, informational, narrative, and argument writing pieces is a crucial gear of instruction this year. As per the common core learning standards, these are vital pieces of writing our students will need to be proficient in and to be successful in the high school level. Guidance Counselors also attend information meetings at high schools to become versed in how to best counsel and place students into appropriate high schools that will meet the various needs of an ELL student. Guidance Counselors also meet with 2018-19 CEP 62  7 th and 8 th grade parents to give them information about the high school choices that are best for their children. The parent coordinator also attends that meeting to assist with language translation. All information is given to parents in the preferred language. All staff continue to be trained in language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs, specific ENL Methodologies, ENL Assessments and data trends, Close Reading strategies, Workstations, and Conferencing with Teacher Assessment Notebooks. Content area teachers continue to receive training in ESL strategies that will help prepare students for the NYSESLAT exam. The PLC (Professional Learning Committee) meets on a weekly basis and creates the agenda for each Monday's PD. The committee meets, discusses and records all PD activities. They ensure that all CR Part 154.2 requirements are met. Assistant Principals collect the agendas and attendance which they then put into a PD binder that is housed in the Principal's office. Parents are invited to attend meetings with the teams on Tuesday during parent involvement. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday from 2:20-3:35, as per UFT bargaining agreement , teachers are required to utilize their time for parent engagement. Additionally, teachers also use their prep periods to make phone calls and set up meeting with parents. If an interpreter is required and not available at the school teachers utilize the interpretation and translation help desk. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Typically, most parents of ELL students are hesitant about becoming involved in the school community. This is primarily due to the following circumstances: limited English proficiency, lack of understanding of our educational system and/or culture, work conflicts, and undocumented legal status. To help to break down some of these barriers and engage these parents in our school, we offer adult ENL classes, computer instruction, preparation for the naturalization exam, and workshops on educational issues such as testing, grading, common core standards, high school information, the Skedula grades system. Letters and fliers are translated into the major languages spoken in our school, interpreters are provided at meetings, parent teacher conferences, and at team or IEP meetings with families. The school website has a translation tab that allows parents to view the entire website in the language of their choice through Google Translate. At the beginning of each school year a list of student interpreters, speaking nearly every language in the building, is compiled and distributed to the main office, administrative and guidance staff to assist in providing interpretation to parents who come in to the building and do not understand or speak English. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Judy Mittler, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: I.S. 125 School DBN: 24Q125 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Judy L. Mittler Title Principal Andrea Gnecco Assistant Principal Ken Ruiz Parent Coordinator Georgia Athanasopoulos ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA Parent Thomas Liverani Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area Kristie LaTorre Nina Romanitch Coach Coach Celia Hanney School Counselor NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Paola Sciove Other IEP Coordinator NA NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 NA 6/30/17 NA 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 NA NA 6/30/17 NA NA 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q125 School Name: Thomas J. McCann Superintendent: Madeline Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon arrival into our building, the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) is given to the parents in the home language spoken. In some cases, pedagogues who speak the majority languages (Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Korean) in our building are used for translation support to our parents. During the ELL Parent Information Sessions, all materials given are translated into the necessary languages. Furthermore our bilingual teachers are invited to sit and assist parents in any way possible. Once parents have completed the HLIS for incoming students, the information culled in Part III (parent preferred language for written and oral communication) is put into ATS under the Parent Biographical Information. Emergency Blue Cards are used to updated parents' preferred language for students who have already been in the school system. Once the information is updated on ATS a RAPL report is run by class and grade. This information is shared with the homeroom teachers, ENL teachers, content teachers, and support staff. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language At IS 125, the preferred languages for both written and oral communication for our ELL students include: Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Korean, and Chinese. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All letters and documents that are disseminated to the families at IS 125 are translated into all languages as listed above, these documents consist of but are not limited to: school calendars, assessment calendars, student handbook and expectations, promotional letters, parent-teacher conference letters, parent workshops, and newsletters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 67  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings include the four mandated formal parent-teacher conferences (September, November, March, and May), curriculum night (September), parent engagement times on Tuesday afternoons, parent program selection meetings as necessary, parent orientation and other meetings teachers schedule with parents as necessary to inform them of their children's progress. Informally the attendance teacher and guidance counselors call homes when there is a student who has excessive abscences. Additionally the guidance counselors also call parents if there is a behavioral issue that needs to be addressed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 concerning parental notification requirements by providing parents with information about their right to translation services, and making a copy of this notification available in the school's main office in all the major languages. Parents in need of translation services will be sent to 2018-19 CEP 68  the main office, where it will be determined what language is needed, and where every attempt to provide services in this language will be made. Important signage throughout the school will be posted in English, Spanish and Bengali, especially signs that relate to safety. The notice of the translation policy is also posted in the main lobby of the school in the major languages for which interpretation is provided by the DOE. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of services we disseminate a Parent Survey, translated into the major languages spoken at our school. At PTA meetings, parents are also encouraged to voice their opinions to members of the PTA Executive Board, who speak the high frequency languages. The Executive Board members then report back to the administration with any major concerns during SLT (School Leadership Team) meetings. Addtionally, parents can also reach out to the parent coordinator to discuss matters of importance to them and their families. Utilizing these mechanisms we are able to address the greatest needs of our parents. 2018-19 CEP 69 
